Comment A successful UN High-Level Meeting on antimicrobial resistance must build on the 2023 UN High-Level Meeting on tuberculosis In September, world leaders will meet at the UN High- prescribed.5 Insufficient action on One Health remains Level Meeting (UNHLM) on Antimicrobial Resistance a crucial gap in public health defence, not just against (AMR).1 Drug-resistant tuberculosis is one of the major AMR. drivers of AMR-associated morbidity and mortality Second, Member States must commit to developing globally.2 The emergence and spread of AMR has set and funding national diagnostic and surveillance the tuberculosis response back decades. Advancement strategies to ensure clinicians and public health leaders in research and political leadership, including through are no longer operating with insufficient data to two UNHLMs on tuberculosis, have developed new inform sound decision making. These systems cannot pathways for progress in addressing tuberculosis.3 These be disease-specific if they are to meet the needs of the efforts will be fatally undermined if governments fail to 4 billion people with little to no access to diagnostic increase efforts to address AMR. services, including the 230 000 people with drug- AMR, and drug-resistant tuberculosis in particular, are resistant tuberculosis who go undiagnosed each year.6 complex public health challenges.4 Mutations leading The speed at which the most novel antibiotics have to drug resistance are a natural occurrence, but their been compromised by AMR underlines the importance emergence is accelerated when pathogens are exposed of ensuring diagnostics for rapid detection of resistance to incorrect antibiotics or insufficient doses. Vulnerable are rolled out alongside any new antibiotics.7 populations exposed to increased risk factors for Third, an equitable AMR agenda must include contracting infectious diseases also face the greatest a commitment to universal access to quality antibiotic barriers to accessing quality health care, and thus are at treatments for people who need them. In 2022, greater risk of AMR. An effective public health response 3 million people with drug-sensitive tuberculosis did not relies on systems that work closely together across access proper diagnosis and treatment, with many likely health systems, including public, private, and informal to have received inappropriate antibiotics.8 Member providers. States must set targets to increase access to effective, As scientists and health-care professionals working safe, narrow-spectrum antibiotics, while bolstering across more than 25 UN Member States, we are acutely action to reduce inappropriate prescribing across the aware of the interconnectedness of these two agendas. public, private, and informal health-care systems.9 Such To set the foundation for an effective and equitable action must be accompanied by strengthened licensing, global response to major AMR threats, including drug- procurement, and quality assurance systems, to put resistant tuberculosis, governments must ensure an end to stock-outs and substandard antibiotics that the 2024 UNHLM on AMR builds on the political worsen the AMR situation. commitments made on tuberculosis last year. There is Fourth, innovation must keep pace with AMR. Key no shortage of opportunities to do so. research gaps that cut across the whole AMR agenda, First, reducing the number of people at risk of including tuberculosis, include improving understanding tuberculosis and other infectious diseases is crucial to of the mechanisms and drivers of AMR, development of minimising the need for antibiotic treatments and hence new vaccines, diagnostics and treatment regimens, and the selection for further drug resistance. Alongside social science, economic, and implementation research. the Sustainable Development Goal of ending poverty, Having witnessed the market failure that slows research tackling undernutrition, bolstering infection prevention and development of tools to prevent, diagnose, and and control measures in transmission hotspots, treat all AMR pathogens, and particularly for poverty- increasing access to vaccines, and strengthening water, associated AMR pathogens, Member States must not sanitation, and hygiene services would drastically reduce only commit to plugging funding gaps with public infections, and therefore the amount of antibiotics resourcing, but also reaffirm their commitment to www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1225 Comment upholding the right to enjoy the products of scientific IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy (DCi); RIVM National Institute innovation for all people.10 for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, Netherlands (RA); Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland (SG); Department of Finally, the AMR response will fail if not supported by Global Health, School of Public Health, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA robust, multisectoral, and accountable governance. The (CRH); Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Aga Khan University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan (RH); MRC Unit The Gambia, London School of specific, time-bound targets agreed at the UNHLM on Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Fajara, The Gambia (SD); Faculty of Medicine and tuberculosis must not only be reaffirmed but backed by Psychology, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California, Tijuana, Mexico (RL-L); Universitas Sebelas Maret, Surakarta, Indonesia (AP); National Centre for equally ambitious targets on the broader AMR agenda. Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases, Tbilisi, Georgia (NT); Ribeirão School of Nursing, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil (RAA); Brazilian Tuberculosis Research To deliver on them, Member States must commit to Network, REDE-TB, São Paulo, Brazil (RAA);Department of Community Medicine bolstering AMR governance and financing mechanisms, and Primary Health Care, Bingham University, Abuja, Nigeria (JSB); Department of Medicine, Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (SB); enabling the AMR and tuberculosis communities to Department of Pulmonology and Allergology, Nicolae Testemitanu State address their most complex and shared challenges University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Chișinău, Moldova (DCh); International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, Paris, France (C-YC); National together, including through increased engagement by Tuberculosis Centre, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (GKa); Department of Infectious Disease civil society and affected communities, and the creation Epidemiology and Dynamics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK (GKn); School of Medicine, V N Kharazin Kharkiv National University, of a global independent scientific panel on AMR to Kharkiv, Ukraine (OK); Department of Clinical Medicine, Copenhagen University ensure the global response keeps pace with scientific Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark (AK); German Center for Infection Research, Hamburg–Lübeck–Borstel–Riems, Germany (CL); Clinical Infectious Diseases, progress and the evolving AMR threat, including drug- Research Center Borstel, Germany (CL); Respiratory Medicine & International resistant tuberculosis.4 Health, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany (CL); Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA (CL); Texas Childrens’ Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA (CL); No effort to end tuberculosis will be successful without Infectious DIseases Institute, Makerere University College of Health Sciences, a robust AMR response, and no AMR response will be Kampala, Uganda (HM-K); Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, Australia (EM); Division of Pulmonology completed without eliminating tuberculosis. With and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St Mary’s the UNHLM on AMR following similar summits on Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea (JM); Department of Infectious Diseases, Vall D’Hebron University Hospital, tuberculosis, universal health coverage, and pandemic Barcelona, Spain (AS-M); School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of prevention, preparedness, and response, UN Member Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada (GS); Mongolian Anti-TB Coalition, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia (BT); South African Medical Research Council, Pretoria, South Africa States are in a unique position to ensure an aligned (MVDW); Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, University of Ghana, global public health agenda. The antibiotic emergency Accra, Ghana (DY-M); Campaigns in Global Health, London, UK (JH) is too grave to miss this opportunity to mobilise 1 President of the UN General Assembly. AMR modalities final text. https://www.un.org/pga/78/2024/03/18/letter-from-president-general- a comprehensive, coordinated, and multisectoral assembly-amr-modalities-final-text/ (accessed May 22, 2024). response to AMR. 2 Antimicrobial Resistance Collaborators. Global burden of antimicrobial resistance in 2019: a systematic analysis. Lancet 2022; 399: 629–55. CL is supported by the German Center of Infection Research under grant 3 UN General Assembly. Political declaration of the High-Level Meeting on agreement TTU-TB 02.709. All other authors declare no competing interests. the fight against tuberculosis. 2023. https://digitallibrary.un.org/ This Comment is based on the work of the Global Scientific Panel on AMR and record/4025280?ln=en&v=pdf (accessed May 22, 2024). TB, of which all authors were a member. The Global Scientific Panel on AMR and 4 Interagency Coordination Group on Antimicrobial Resistance. No time to TB was convened by Campaigns in Global Health and the Intellectual Forum at wait: securing the future from drug-resistant infections. Report to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 2019. https://www.who.int/docs/ Jesus College, Cambridge, UK. No panel members received any remuneration for default-source/documents/no-time-to-wait-securing-the-future-from- their participation in the panel. drug-resistant-infections-en.pdf (accessed May 22, 2024). Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 5 Stop TB Partnership. Global plan to end TB 2023–2030. 2023. https://www. Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. stoptb.org/global-plan-to-end-tb/global-plan-to-end-tb-2023-2030 (accessed May 22, 2024). Daniela Cirillo, Richard Anthony, Sebastien Gagneux, 6 Fleming KA, Horton S, Wilson ML, et al. The Lancet Commission on C Robert Horsburgh Jr, Rumina Hasan, Saffiatou Darboe, diagnostics: transforming access to diagnosis. Lancet 2021; 398: 1997–2050. Rafael Laniado-Laborin, Ari Probandari, Nestani Tukvadze, 7 Köser CU, Maurer FP, Kranzer K. Those who cannot remember the past are Ricardo A Arcêncio, John S Bimba, Susanna Brighenti, condemned to repeat it: drug-susceptibility testing for bedaquiline and Dumitru Chesov, Chen-Yuan Chiang, delamanid. Int J Infect Dis 2019; 80S: S32–35. Gulmira Kalmambetova, Gwenan Knight, 8 WHO. Global tuberculosis report 2023. 2023. https://www.who.int/teams/ global-tuberculosis-programme/tb-reports/global-tuberculosis- Olha Konstantynovska, Alexandra Kruse, Christoph Lange, report-2023 (accessed May 22, 2024). Harriet Mayanja-Kizza, Emma McBryde, Jinsoo Min, 9 WHO. The WHO AWARE (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book. 2022. Adrian Sanchez-Montalva, Giorgia Sulis, https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240062382 (accessed May 22, 2024). Bazarragchaa Tsogt, Martie Van Der Walt, 10 UN. Universal declaration on human rights. 1948. https://www.un.org/en/ Dorothy Yeboah-Manu, *Janika Hauser about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights (accessed May 22, 2024). janika@cghproject.org e1226 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024