Comment Can resistance testing improve outcomes for children and adolescents with HIV? The global scale-up of HIV antiretroviral therapy (ART) prevention and treatment goals by 2025, but lag in viral See Articles page e1312 has generated substantial individual and public health suppression rates in children and adolescents.6 The GIVE- benefits. Viral suppression restores immune function MOVE trial can contribute to a larger global conversation and halts HIV transmission. Progress for children on the role of laboratory-informed HIV clinical care and and adolescents has been more delayed than it has the combination of biomedical, sociobehavioural, and been for adults. As of 2022, 1·5 million children aged structural interventions needed to realise the health 1–14 years were living with HIV.1 Global estimates of viral benefits of ART for children and adolescents with HIV. suppression vary substantially by region, but show lower The trial analysed 284 participants (144 in the GRT rates of viral suppression in children compared with group and 140 in the usual care group), aged 6 months adults. In a large cohort analysis of people who initiated to 19 years, across ten clinical centres and had low rates ART between 2010 and 2019, adjusting for missing of loss to follow-up, with five (3%) participants in the viral load data, 59% of those younger than 18 years had GRT group and four (3%) in the usual care group. The viral suppression at 3 years after the initiation of ART design, implemented in real-world settings, allowed compared with 65% of adults.2 for standardised window periods to assess outcomes. HIV drug resistance can diminish ART efficacy and the The primary outcome was death, hospitalisation, a new probability of viral suppression. Causes of resistance WHO HIV clinical stage 4 event, or the absence of a viral in children and adolescents include suboptimal ART load of less than 50 copies per mL within the 36-week adherence, food and drug interactions, and improper study period. The authors found no significant difference weight-based dosing. In low-income and middle- between GRT and usual care (67 [47%] participants income countries, additional factors include exposure in the GRT group vs 73 [52%] in the usual care group; to non-nucleoside reductase inhibitors as part of the adjusted odds ratio 0·79 [95% CI 0·49 to 1·27]; adjusted prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission, ART risk difference –0·06 [95% CI –0·17 to 0·06]; p=0·34). supply shortages, insufficient laboratory and clinical GRT did not alter clinical and virological outcomes capacity to receive and integrate viral-load and drug- for this cohort, of which 274 (96%) had WHO stage 1 resistance results into individual care, and climactic disease. Given that lower CD4 counts are associated with disasters, political conflict, and emerging infectious emergence of drug resistance,7 the effect of GRT might diseases outbreaks that can destabilise access to health have been more pronounced in those with late-stage services.3 Globally, the clinical effect of genotype disease and could be a key area of focus for country resistance testing (GRT) for children and adolescents programmes. with HIV is unknown because public health programmes The study excluded 26 (18%) participants in the widely use dolutegravir, an integrase strand transfer GRT group and ten (7%) in the usual care group inhibitor with a high genetic barrier to resistance.4 from the primary analysis due to a delayed or absent In The Lancet Global Health, Jennifer Anne Brown and treatment-decision visit. Qualitative research with colleagues present the Genotype-Informed Versus participants not engaged in the study but able to be Empirical Management Of Viremia (GIVE-MOVE) trial,5 tracked in follow-up could offer valuable feedback on examining whether children and adolescents with HIV intervention development. Existing evidence-based and viraemia benefit from the addition of GRT versus interventions for the engagement of youth in HIV care, usual care, consisting of adherence counselling, viral- such as integration of peer workers and novel digital load monitoring, and empirical clinical decision making. adherence applications, provide a scaffold from which to The trial was conducted in Lesotho and Tanzania, incorporate GRT without deterring youth.8–10 two sub-Saharan countries that are hyperendemic HIV The GIVE-MOVE trial underscores the complexity of areas with modest public-health resources. Lesotho ART adherence in this population: of the 84 participants and Tanzania have excelled at reaching the UNAIDS HIV in the GRT group with successful GRT, 32 (38%) had www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1219 Comment no major drug-resistance mutations at viraemia, Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open implying that recent ART non-adherence was the most Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. likely driver of HIV viraemia. Almost half (129 [45%]) *Julie H Levison, Catherine Orrell of the participants had at least one deceased parent. jlevison@mgb.org Adherence interventions that address adverse childhood Division of General Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, and Mongan Institute, Massachusetts General experiences and integrate the family unit and social Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA (JHL); Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, support will assure that children and adolescents receive USA (JHL); Desmond Tutu HIV Centre, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine, and Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, the services they need as programmes move to simplify Cape Town, South Africa (CO) and tailor services, such as in the implementation of 1 UNAIDS. Fact sheet: global HIV statistics. Aug 31, 2023. https://www. unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_asset/UNAIDS_FactSheet_en.pdf long-acting ART.11 (accessed June 23, 2024). All participants were to receive enhanced adherence 2 Han WM, Law MG, Egger M, et al. Global estimates of viral suppression in children and adolescents and adults on antiretroviral therapy adjusted for counselling over three visits during 9 months, but missing viral load measurements: a multiregional, retrospective cohort the number and duration of adherence visits that study in 31 countries. Lancet HIV 2021; 8: e766–75. 3 Koay WLA, Kose-Otieno J, Rakhmanina N. HIV drug resistance in children participants actually completed (ie, dose of behavioural and adolescents: always a challenge? Curr Epidemiol Rep 2021; 8: 97–107. intervention) or the extent to which the delivery of the 4 McCluskey SM, Pepperrell T, Hill A, Venter WDF, Gupta RK, Siedner MJ. Adherence, resistance, and viral suppression on dolutegravir in sub-Saharan adherence content matched the expected protocol (ie, Africa: implications for the TLD era. AIDS 2021; 35 (suppl 2): S127–35. fidelity) is not clear. Data on adherence dose and fidelity 5 Brown JA, Ringera IK, Luoga E, et al. Resistance-informed versus empirical management of viraemia in children and adolescents with HIV in Lesotho would help explain the relationship of the adherence and Tanzania (GIVE MOVE trial): a multisite, open-label randomised controlled trial. Lancet Glob Health 2024; 12: e1312–22. intervention effect on the outcomes. 6 ICAP at Columbia University. (PHIA) Project: countries. Nov 22, 2016. The clinical benefit of GRT at viraemia in sub- https://phia.icap.columbia.edu/countries/ (accessed May 17, 2024). 7 Lepik KJ, Harrigan PR, Yip B, et al. Emergent drug resistance with integrase Saharan Africa, a region with two-thirds of the global strand transfer inhibitor-based regimens. AIDS 2017; 31: 1425–34. HIV prevalence, remains uncertain. The GIVE-MOVE 8 Ahonkhai AA, Kuti KM, Hirschhorn LR, et al. Successful implementation strategies in iCARE Nigeria—a pilot intervention with text message trial presents a road map for future effectiveness and reminders and peer navigation for youth living with HIV. Trop Med Infect Dis 2023; 8: 498. implementation trials to identify the population of 9 Zanoni B, Archary M, Sibaya T, et al. Interventions addressing the children and adolescents with HIV to receive GRT and adolescent HIV continuum of care in South Africa: a systematic review and modified Delphi analysis. BMJ Open 2022; 12: e057797. the types of interventions needed at the individual, 10 Sumari-de Boer IM, Ngowi KM, Swai IU, et al. Effect of a customized digital clinic, and health-system level. adherence tool on retention in care and adherence to antiretroviral treatment in breastfeeding women, children and adolescents living with JHL has stock options with Abbvie, Merck, and Pfizer. CO received honoraria HIV in Tanzania: a mixed-methods study followed by clinical trials. Trials from MSD and ViiV for attending expert consultation meetings. This Comment 2023; 24: 285. was supported by the US National Institute of Mental Health (R01MH132428). 11 Toska E, Zhou S, Chen-Charles J, Gittings L, Operario D, Cluver L. The funders had no role in decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. Factors associated with preferences for long-acting injectable antiretroviral The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily therapy among adolescents and young people living with HIV in South represent the official views of Harvard University and its affiliated academic Africa. AIDS Behav 2023; 27: 2163–75. health-care centres or the National Institutes of Health. e1220 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024