Articles Cost-effectiveness of group medical visits and microfinance interventions versus usual care to manage hypertension in Kenya: a secondary modelling analysis of data from the Bridging Income Generation with Group Integrated Care (BIGPIC) trial Junxing Chay, Rebecca J Su, Jemima H Kamano, Benjamin Andama, Gerald S Bloomfield, Allison K Delong, Carol R Horowitz, Diana Menya, Richard Mugo, Vitalis Orango, Sonak D Pastakia, Cleophas Wanyonyi, Rajesh Vedanthan*, Eric A Finkelstein* Summary Background The Bridging Income Generation with Group Integrated Care (BIGPIC) trial in rural Kenya showed Lancet Glob Health 2024; that integrating usual care with group medical visits or microfinance interventions reduced systolic blood 12: e1331–42 pressure and cardiovascular risk in participants. We aimed to estimate the incremental cost-effectiveness of *Joint senior authors three BIGPIC interventions for a modelled cohort and by sex, as well as the cost of implementing these Health Services and Systems interventions. Research, Duke–NUS Medical School, Singapore (J Chay PhD, R J Su BA, Methods For this analysis, we used data collected during the BIGPIC trial, a four-group, cluster-randomised trial Prof E A Finkelstein PhD); School conducted in the western Kenyan catchment area of the Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare. BIGPIC of Medicine, Moi University enrolled participants from 24 rural health facilities in rural western Kenya aged 35 years or older with either College of Health Sciences, Eldoret, Kenya increased blood pressure or diabetes. Participants were assigned to receive either usual care, group medical visits, (J H Kamano MBChB, microfinance, or a combination of group medical visits and microfinance (GMV–MF). Our model estimated the D Menya MBChB); Academic incremental cost-effectiveness of the three BIGPIC interventions via seven health states (ie, a hypertensive state, Model Providing Access to five chronic cardiovascular-disease states, and a death state) by simulating transitions between health states for a Healthcare, Eldoret, Kenya (B Andama MA, R Mugo MSc, hypothetical cohort of individuals with hypertension on the basis of QRISK3 scores. In every cycle, participants V Orango BSc, C Wanyonyi MA); accrued costs and disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) associated with their health state. Incremental cost- Duke Global Health Institute, effectiveness ratios (ICERs) were calculated for the entire modelled cohort and by sex by dividing the incremental Duke University, Durham, NC, cost by the incremental effectiveness of the next most expensive intervention. The main outcome of this analysis USA (G S Bloomfield MD, Prof E A Finkelstein); Center for was ICERs for each intervention evaluated. This analysis is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02501746). Statistical Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA Findings Between Feb 6, 2017, and Dec 29, 2019, 2890 people were recruited to the BIGPIC trial. (A K Delong MSc); Institute for 2020 (69·9%) of 2890 participants were female and 870 (30·1%) were male. At baseline, mean QRISK3 Health Equity Research, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount score was 11·5 (95% CI 11·1–11·9) for the trial population, 11·9 (11·5–12·2) for male participants, and 11·3 Sinai, New York, NY, USA (11·0–11·6) for female participants. For the population of Kenya, group medical visits were estimated to cost (Prof C R Horowitz MD); US$7 more per individual than usual care and result in 0·005 more DALYs averted (ICER $1455 per DALY averted). Department of Pharmacy Microfinance was estimated to cost $19 more than group medical visits but was only estimated to avert 0·001 more Practice, Purdue University College of Pharmacy, West DALYs. Relative to group medical visits, GMV–MF was estimated to cost $29 more and avert 0·009 more DALYs Lafayette, IN, USA ($3235 per DALY averted). Relative to usual care, GMV–MF was estimated to cost $37 more and avert 0·014 more (Prof S D Pastakia PharmD); DALYs ($2601 per DALY averted). In the first year of the intervention, usual care was estimated to be the least Department of Population Health, Grossman School of expensive intervention to implement ($87 per participant; $10 238 per health-facility catchment area [HFCA]), Medicine, New York University, then group medical visits ($99 per participant; $12 268 per HFCA), then microfinance ($120 per participant; New York, NY, USA $14 172 per HFCA), with GMV–MF estimated to be the most expensive intervention to implement (Prof R Vedanthan MD) ($139 per participant; $16 913 per HFCA). Correspondence to: Dr Junxing Chay, Health Services Interpretation Group medical visits and GMV–MF were estimated to be cost-effective strategies to improve blood- and Systems Research, Duke–NUS Medical School, pressure control in rural Kenya. However, which intervention to pursue depends on resource availability. Policy Singapore 169857 makers should consider these factors, in addition to sex differences in programme effectiveness, when selecting junxing.chay@duke-nus.edu.sg optimal implementation strategies. Funding US National Institutes of Health. Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1331 Articles Research in context Evidence before this study rural communities in Kenya. Furthermore, we estimated the Hypertension is a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases, value of adapting interventions by gender. We found that, the leading cause of premature mortality globally. The Bridging due to the differential effectiveness of interventions by Income Generation with Group Integrated Care (BIGPIC) trial gender, group medical visits were estimated to be cost- showed that community-based interventions targeting effective for women but not for men, whereas GMV–MF was financial and social barriers to hypertension care could reduce estimated to be cost-effective for women and men. To our hypertension disease burden and mortality in rural Kenya. knowledge, our analysis is one of the first to establish the However, to our knowledge, the cost-effectiveness of these value of group medical visits, microfinance, and GMV–MF interventions has not yet been shown. To our knowledge, in LMICs. no evidence of the cost-effectiveness of group medical visits, Implications of all the available evidence microfinance, or a combination of group medical visits and Our findings support the integration of BIGPIC features microfinance (GMV–MF) to improve hypertension care in (ie, group medical visits and GMV–MF) into standard care for low-income and middle-income countries (LMICs) exists. hypertension in Kenya and suggest that interventions should Added value of this study be adapted by gender. Our findings could improve the delivery, We used a model-based approach to estimate the incremental equity, and accessibility of hypertension-management cost-effectiveness of group medical visits and microfinance resources, especially for rural populations, and reduce interventions compared with usual care for participants in the preventable cardiovascular incidents and deaths. Moreover, BIGPIC hypertension trial in rural Kenya. We found that group as BIGPIC used existing health-care infrastructure, our findings medical visits and GMV–MF were likely to be incrementally could be generalisable to other LMICs with similar health cost-effective strategies to improve blood-pressure control in settings or populations. Introduction aimed to estimate the incremental cost-effectiveness of Cardiovascular disease constitutes approximately a third of the three BIGPIC interventions for a modelled cohort deaths worldwide, with 80% of deaths from cardiovascular and by sex, as well as the cost of implementing these disease occurring in low-income and middle-income interventions. countries (LMICs).1 Hypertension is a leading risk factor for cardiovascular disease and is one of the most modifiable Methods due to the widespread availability of low-cost and effective Study design and participants medications. However, the prevalence of hypertension For this analysis, we predominantly used data collected continues to increase in LMICs, where blood-pressure during the BIGPIC trial. The BIGPIC trial was a four- control is low.2 group, cluster-randomised trial conducted in the In Kenya, almost a third of adults have hypertension.3 western Kenyan catchment area of the Academic Model Despite the availability of low-cost antihypertensive Providing Access to Healthcare (AMPATH) chronic treatments, many adults remain untreated and only disease-management programme, a multicomponent, half of those receiving treatment have adequate blood- facility-based hypertension and diabetes management pressure control.4 This low rate of treatment could programme.8 AMPATH provided usual care, which met be attributable to socioeconomic challenges such criteria for the task-shifted model of chronic-disease as inequitable access to health care, inability to afford management recommended by the Kenyan Ministry of medication, little education and awareness, or high Health.9 opportunity costs of seeking treatment.5,6 BIGPIC enrolled participants from 24 rural health In 2021, we reported the efficacy of a large, community- facilities in rural western Kenya between Feb 6, 2017, based, cluster-randomised trial in Kenya that was named and Dec 29, 2019, all of whom were aged 35 years or Bridging Income Generation with Group Integrated Care older and had either increased blood pressure (BIGPIC).7 In 2890 individuals, integrating usual care for (ie, SBP ≥140 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure hypertension with group medical visits, microfinance, or [DBP] ≥90 mm Hg) or diabetes (ie, fasting glucose a combination of group medical visits and microfinance ≥7 mmol/L or random glucose ≥11·1 mmol/L).10 Health (GMV–MF) improved systolic blood pressure (SBP) and facilities were clustered into four trial groups (ie, usual overall cardiovascular risk more so than usual care.7 care, microfinance, group medical visits, and GMV–MF). Furthermore, in all groups, female participants had Further detail has been reported previously.7,10 greater SBP reductions than male participants.7 Participants provided written informed consent for the Although these interventions showed potential in trial and all subsequent analyses. reducing SBP compared with usual care, their cost- The BIGPIC protocol was approved by the institutional effectiveness and affordability were not evaluated. We review boards of Moi University College of Health e1332 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 Articles Sciences (Eldoret, Kenya), the Icahn School of Medicine medical visits and microfinance were not more effective at Mount Sinai (New York, NY, USA), and the Grossman than usual care, we also calculated the average cost- School of Medicine (New York University, New York, NY, effectiveness ratio of GMV–MF relative to usual care. USA). Ethics approval was provided for both the trial and QRISK3 scores were calculated individually for each this analysis. This Article was written in accordance with participant on the basis of collected participant data in the CHEERS guideline (appendix pp 3–5).11 the BIGPIC trial. They measure an individual’s risk of See Online for appendix This analysis is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov having a heart attack or stroke in the next 10 years and (NCT02501746). are based on age, sex, ethnicity, and clinical information (eg, SBP, diabetes, and cholesterol).13 Blood pressure Procedures and hypertension data were collected by an AMPATH Group medical visits incorporated group-based care physician using standard medical protocols. Sex data and health education to improve chronic-disease were self-reported; the options were male or female. management and preventive care.12 Participants Cardiovascular events were defined as either a heart assigned to group medical visits joined group meetings attack or a stroke, two of the most common major acute once per month, which consisted of individual cardiovascular events associated with hypertension.14 consultations with a clinician and a group discussion Data quality was vetted internally by AKD, VO, and RM led by community health workers about a self-care or a (appendix p 6). health-education topic. Participants assigned to the microfinance intervention received usual care and met Model structure once per month in community savings groups to Our model to estimate the incremental cost-effectiveness manage their savings and contribute to a social fund for of the three BIGPIC interventions consisted of seven emergency or welfare purposes, with the intervention health states (ie, a hypertensive state; five chronic providing interest-bearing loans to group members. cardiovascular-disease states, which were defined by the Participants assigned to GMV–MF joined group number and type of cardiovascular-disease events that meetings once per month, which consisted of an a participant had had; and a death state; figure 1). All initial microfinance intervention and then clinical care participants began in the hypertensive state after the end in the form of group medical visits once per month. of their assigned intervention and incurred intervention Usual care consisted of AMPATH’s multicomponent costs. For simplicity, we assumed that all individuals did chronic disease-management programme, which used not have a heart attack or stroke during the intervention medicines contained in the Kenyan national formulary period. For every cycle that a participant remained in the and included both pharmacological interventions (eg, hypertensive state, they incurred the cost of hypertension medications for hypertension and diabetes, blood medication and the disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) tests, and urine analysis) and non-pharmacological of having hypertension or diabetes. interventions (eg, blood-pressure screening and In each annual cycle of the model, individuals had the education for management of hypertension and risk of heart attack or stroke, which could have been diabetes). fatal, and the risk of dying from non-cardiovascular- Interventions were conducted for 1 year and disease causes. Heart attacks and strokes incurred For TreeAge Pro see participants were not charged for clinic visits. Usual care a hospitalisation (ie, treatment in hospital) cost of 14 days https://www.treeage.com and the cost of medication was the same for participants across groups. Data sources Chronic cardiovascular disease Severe chronic cardiovascular due to one heart attack disease due to two heart attacks We developed a Markov model in TreeAge Pro version R2 to simulate transitions between health states for a hypothetical cohort of individuals with hypertension on the basis of QRISK3 scores. Using annual cycles, we Severe chronic cardiovascular No cardiovascular disease disease due to one heart attack estimated costs and utility decrements associated with and one stroke cardiovascular events during the next 10 years after the intervention. We based the characteristics of our cohort on the BIGPIC trial participants.7 Our model used Chronic cardiovascular disease Severe chronic cardiovascular a hypothetical cohort of individuals aged 61 years, the due to one stroke disease due to two strokes mean age of BIGPIC participants, who had been diagnosed with hypertension or diabetes but had no Death history of cardiovascular disease. GMV–MF was the only effective intervention relative to Figure 1: Markov diagram usual care in the original BIGPIC trial; group medical Rectangles show exclusive health states. Curved arrows indicate transitions to the same health state. Straight visits and microfinance were not effective. As group arrows indicate transitions to other health states. Transitions to the death state could occur from any state. www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1333 Articles and a DALY decrement of 28 days. Individuals who lived with cardiovascular-disease history with those without.18 after a heart attack or stroke transitioned to one of the We multiplied the implied hazard rates of the first chronic cardiovascular-disease states on the basis of cardiovascular-disease event and related mortality rate by their history, in which they incurred the cost of chronic the hazard ratios of participants with a history of stroke cardiovascular-disease management and associated only, heart attack only, or both heart attack and stroke to DALYs. As risk of cardiovascular-disease events increases derive the annual probability of a subsequent heart with previous history of cardiovascular disease, attack or stroke. We used the same method to obtain individuals in chronic states had increased risk of survival probabilities for subsequent cardiovascular- a second or third cardiovascular-disease event in disease events (appendix pp 8–10). Kenyan life tables subsequent cycles. For tractability, our model allowed for were used to inform age-specific probabilities of dying a maximum of two non-fatal cardiovascular-disease from non-cardiovascular-disease causes.17 events; a third event was assumed to be fatal. Individuals in the death state incurred zero costs and a DALY of 1 for Costs and disability weights each cycle until the end of the model. The parameter Costs were considered from the perspective of the inputs and ranges of values used for analysis for our health-care system in Kenya and included the costs of model are provided (table 1). interventions, medical costs related to hypertensive and Our model structure was consistent with previously chronic-disease states, and hospitalisation costs. We published cost-effectiveness studies evaluating hyper- used the activity-based costing approach26 to track tension interventions.21–23 intervention costs prospectively using standard cost- collection instruments, such as validated cost tracking Transition probabilities forms and questionnaires, which captured all relevant We derived the annual probability of a first cardiovascular- labour, materials, supplies, and contracted-services costs disease event from QRISK3 scores. QRISK3 scores were to deliver the interventions, including administration calculated at baseline and after the BIGPIC intervention and oversight, clinician and field-staff training, completion. Effects of an intervention on QRISK3 scores participant training, baseline screening, confirmatory were modelled via linear mixed-effects models, with tests, implementation, quarterly reviews, and usual-care random effects used to consider clustering of individuals activities. The costs of each intervention per person were in health-facility catchment areas. Control variables obtained by summing costs of activities associated with included the baseline covariates age, sex, recruitment each intervention group and dividing by the number of pathway (ie, newly screened, previously screened but not participants in that group. Costs related to hypertension linked to care, active in care for less than 6 months, and chronic cardiovascular-disease management were previously in care but no clinic visit in past 6 months, estimated by clinicians who were familiar with the and currently in private care but wishing to transfer to local health-care system, including RV, and included the public sector care system), amount of pre-trial medications, clinic visits, laboratory tests, and electro- microfinance activity in the cluster at baseline, type of cardiograms. Hospitalisation costs for people who had health facility (ie, dispensary, health centre, or subcounty had heart attacks or strokes were obtained from hospital), cluster-specific mean of outcome, and value of Subramanian and colleagues.15 Costs were captured in the outcome.7 QRISK3 scores for the usual-care group 2020 Kenyan shillings and converted to US$ with the were based on mean QRISK3 scores at baseline. QRISK3 2020 exchange rate of US$0·0093 per Kenyan shilling scores for groups receiving microfinance, group medical (table 1; appendix p 11). visits, or GMV–MF were calculated by subtracting Disability weights were obtained from the Global difference-in-differences estimates from the baseline Burden of Disease Study 2019.16 We identified appropriate score. Similar to previous studies,24,25 10-year risks were disability weights using provided health-state names and annualised, assuming a constant hazard for 10 years simple descriptions in consultation with RV, a cardio- (appendix p 7). logist from the BIGPIC trial. If a disability weight was On the basis of local data, we assumed that not available for a health state, we used disability weights 60% of cardiovascular-disease events were strokes and for similar health conditions (appendix p 12), in 40% were heart attacks.14 The probability of surviving consultation with clinicians, including RV. The disability a stroke or a heart attack were based on people who had weight for the state of having no cardiovascular disease presented at Kenyatta National Hospital (Nairobi, Kenya) (ie, the hypertensive state) was calculated as the and Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital (Eldoret, prevalence-weighted mean of diabetes and hypertension Kenya).19,20 disability weights, representing the characteristics of As QRISK3 scores were only validated for people with participants in the BIGPIC trial. Disability weights for no previous cardiovascular-disease history, probabilities heart attacks were based on acute myocardial infarction for subsequent cardiovascular-disease events were and disability weights for strokes were based on acute estimated by adjusting probabilities of first events with ischaemic stroke. Disability weights for the states of hazard ratios, which compared the risks of participants chronic cardiovascular disease due to heart attack were e1334 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 Articles Base values Deterministic Base values Deterministic sensitivity sensitivity range range QRISK3 score at baseline7 (Continued from previous column) Population 11·5 ·· Annual age-specific all-cause mortality rates17 Men 11·9 ·· 60–64 years 0·02 ·· Women 11·3 ·· 65–69 years 0·03 ·· QRISK3 score change relative to baseline for the population7 70–74 years 0·05 ·· Microfinance –0·41 –1·4 to 0·5 75–79 years 0·07 ·· Group medical visits –0·33 –1·4 to 0·7 80–84 years 0·11 ·· Group medical visits and microfinance –0·93 –1·9 to 0·0 >85 years 0·20 ·· QRISK3 score change relative to baseline in men7 Hazard ratios18 Microfinance –0·12 ··* Heart attack after previous heart attack 1·42 1·20 to 1·69 Group medical visits 0·40 ··* Stroke after previous stroke 2·89 2·37 to 3·53 Group medical visits and microfinance –0·70 ··* Heart attack after previous stroke 1·00 1·00 to 1·32 QRISK3 score change relative to baseline in women7 Stroke after previous heart attack 1·00 1·00 to 1·23 Microfinance –0·52 ··* Heart attack after previous heart attack 1·95 1·37 to 2·82 Group medical visits –0·60 ··* and stroke Group medical visits and microfinance –1·00 ··* Stroke after previous heart attack and 3·13 2·22 to 4·43 stroke Annual cost7 Fatal heart attack after previous heart 1·22 1·03 to 1·43 Usual care $87 ±10% attack Microfinance $120 ±10% Fatal heart attack after previous stroke 1·00 1·03 to 1·43 Group medical visits $99 ±10% Fatal stroke after previous heart attack 1·22 1·00 to 1·35 Group medical visits and microfinance $139 ±10% Fatal stroke after previous stroke 1·00 1·00 to 1·35 Hypertension management $68 ±10% All-cause death after previous cardiac 1·00 1·00 to 1·50 Chronic cardiovascular-disease $125 ±10% event (assumption) management Other parameters Heart attack15 $1996 ±10% Proportion of cardiovascular-disease 0·60 0·5 to 0·7 Stroke15 $1874 ±10% incidence that is strokes (assumption) Health-state disability weights16 Proportion of fatal heart attacks19 0·25 ±10% No cardiovascular disease 0·06 ±10% Proportion of fatal strokes20 0·45 ±10% Chronic cardiovascular disease from 0·08 ±10% Discount rate (assumption) 0·03 0·00 to 0·07 one heart attack Costs are reported per person in 2020 US$. *Data are available in the appendix Chronic cardiovascular disease from 0·14 ±10% (p 12). †Disability weights of cardiac events were weighted to consider the one stroke duration of symptoms. Chronic cardiovascular disease from 0·17 ±10% two heart attacks Table 1: Model inputs Chronic cardiovascular disease from 0·49 ±10% two strokes Chronic cardiovascular disease from 0·33 ±10% effectiveness of the next most expensive intervention. one heart attack and one stroke This ratio presented the additional cost required to Disutility of cardiac events16† avert one DALY relative to the next most expensive Heart attack 0·01 ±10% intervention. As there is currently no consensus on what Stroke 0·01 ±10% the cost-effectiveness threshold for health interventions (Table 1 continues in next column) in Kenya should be, we considered which interventions were cost-effective at various willingness-to-pay (WTP) thresholds. based on disability weights for angina and heart failure We discounted costs and benefits at 3% per annum due to ischaemic heart disease. Disability weights for the beyond the first year, and applied half-cycle correction to states of chronic cardiovascular disease due to stroke account for uncertainty in the timing of transitions were based on disability weights for chronic ischaemic within a cycle. stroke (appendix p 12). Statistical analysis Cost-effectiveness analysis The main outcome of this analysis was ICERs for each Incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) were intervention evaluated. Uncertainty and heterogeneity calculated for the entire modelled cohort and by sex by of the data were accounted for via deterministic and dividing the incremental cost by the incremental probabilistic sensitivity analyses. We investigated the www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1335 Articles To parameterise distributions, we used the base case Total cost Incremental Total DALYs Incremental Incremental cost- value as the mean and corresponding published SE for cost DALYs effectiveness ratio averted SD, if available (table 1). SEs for intervention effectiveness and hazard ratios were derived from published 95% CIs Population (table 1). If SEs were unavailable, we used 10% of the Usual care $793 ·· 1·560 ·· ·· base case value. Results of the probabilistic sensitivity Group medical visits $800 $7 1·555 0·005 $1455 analysis were presented as cost-effectiveness acceptability Microfinance $819 $19 1·554 0·001 Extended dominated* curves that showed each intervention’s probability of Group medical visits and $830 $29 1·546 0·009 $3235 microfinance being optimal (ie, the highest net monetary benefit) at different WTP thresholds. Men For individuals who were lost to follow-up, their QRISK Usual care $800 ·· 1·566 ·· ·· scores were regarded as missing and were removed from Group medical visits $819 $20 1·572 –0·006 Dominated† the analysis. Microfinance $831 $31 1·564 0·002 Extended dominated* Missing data were removed from analysis. Group medical visits and $840 $40 1·555 0·011 $3762 microfinance Data collected for the trial were processed and analysed Women with R version 4.0.0. The modelling analysis was Usual care $790 ·· 1·557 ·· ·· conducted using TreeAge Pro version R2. Group medical visits $793 $3 1·548 0·009 $311 Role of the funding source Microfinance $814 $21 1·549 –0·001 Dominated† The funder of the the original BIGPIC trial and this Group medical visits and $825 $33 1·542 0·006 $5480 microfinance analysis had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. Costs are reported per person in 2020 US$. DALY=disability-adjusted life-year. *A combination of other evaluated interventions could lead to greater DALY reductions at equal or lower cost. †A single alternative intervention could produce the same or greater DALY reductions at equal or lower cost. Results Between Feb 6, 2017, and Dec 29, 2019, 2890 people Table 2: Costs, DALYs, and incremental cost-effectiveness ratios of interventions in the Bridging Income Generation with Group Integrated Care trial during the next 10 years were recruited to the BIGPIC trial. 2020 (69·9%) of 2890 participants were female and 870 (30·1%) were male. At baseline, mean QRISK3 score was 11·5 (95% CI sensitivity of base case results for the entire modelled 11·1–11·9) for the trial population, 11·9 (11·5–12·2) for cohort by extending the time to 20 years—the expected male participants, and 11·3 (11·0–11·6) for female lifetime of the cohort.27 In the absence of information of participants. risk for the next 10 years, we assumed that the probability For the entire modelled cohort, usual care was of having a cardiovascular-disease event did not change estimated to be the least expensive intervention, then from base case during 20 years. Furthermore, we group medical visits, then microfinance, with GMV–MF investigated the cost-effectiveness of a scaled-up version estimated to be the most expensive. Group medical visits of all three BIGPIC interventions, in which interventions were estimated to cost $7 more per individual than usual were ongoing for 10 years for the population. care and result in 0·005 more DALYs averted (ICER We conducted sensitivity analyses using results for the $1455 per DALY averted; table 2). Microfinance was entire modelled cohort only. We conducted a one-way estimated to cost $19 more than group medical visits but deterministic sensitivity analysis to identify the most was only estimated to avert 0·001 more DALYs. As influential parameters on incremental net monetary a result, microfinance was extended dominated, meaning benefits (INMBs) on the basis of a WTP threshold of that a combination of other alternative interventions (ie, two times the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita in group medical visits and GMV–MF) could lead to greater Kenya, as plausible values for intervention effectiveness DALY reductions at equal or lower cost. Relative to group were small and included zero and negative values (table 1). medical visits, GMV–MF was estimated to cost $29 more We also conducted probabilistic sensitivity analysis with and avert 0·009 more DALYs ($3235 per DALY averted). 10 000 iterations to evaluate the effects of statistical Relative to usual care, GMV–MF was estimated to cost uncertainty of parameter values on ICERs. QRISK3 score $37 more and avert 0·014 more DALYs ($2601 per DALY differences were taken from normal distributions, cost averted). parameters were taken from γ distributions, and disability For female participants, microfinance was dominated, weights were taken from β distributions. Values for meaning that a single alternative intervention could hazard ratios, the proportion of cardiovascular-disease produce the same or greater DALY reductions at equal or events that were strokes, and the proportion of fatal lower cost. For male participants, microfinance was cardiovascular-disease events were taken from log-normal extended dominated. For female participants, group distributions. Distributions were chosen to reflect the medical visits were estimated to have an ICER of nature of the parameter and feasible values while $311 per DALY averted relative to usual care, whereas adhering to best practice.28 GMV–MF was estimated to have an ICER of e1336 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 Articles $5480 per DALY averted relative to group medical visits A and an ICER of $2364 per DALY averted relative to usual care. For men, GMV–MF was estimated to have an ICER of $3762 per DALY averted relative to usual care, which Effectiveness of group medical visits was the next most expensive non-dominated intervention, –0·177 as group medical visits were dominated by usual care Cost of group medical visits (appendix p 13). In the first year of the intervention, usual care was Cost of usual care estimated to be the least expensive intervention to implement ($87 per participant; $10 238 per health- Discount rate facility catchment area [HFCA]), then group medical visits ($99 per participant; $12 268 per HFCA), then Proportion of cardiovascular-disease events microfinance ($120 per participant; $14 172 per HFCA), that were strokes with GMV–MF estimated to be the most expensive intervention to implement ($139 per participant; Proportion of fatal strokes $16 913 per HFCA). Assuming the same enrolment in each subsequent year, usual care was estimated to be Proportion of fatal heart attacks the least expensive intervention to implement ($67 per Hazard ratio of non-cardiovascular-disease participant; $7862 per HFCA), then microfinance mortality after previous cardiovascular- ($67 per participant; $7946 per HFCA), then group disease event medical visits ($71 per participant; $8749 per HFCA), Cost of stroke with GMV–MF estimated to be the most expensive Expected value: 11·13 intervention to implement ($72 per participant; $8832 per Disability weight of no cardiovascular disease HFCA; appendix p 11). A 20-year time for the model increased estimated total costs and DALYs for all interventions (appendix p 14). B However, relative to base case, incremental costs between non-dominated interventions were estimated to be lower Effectiveness of group medical visits and microfinance and incremental DALYs averted were estimated to be –0·875 higher due to more cardiovascular events estimated to Cost of group medical visits and be avoided. As a result, group medical visits (ICER microfinance 142·800 $372 per DALY averted) and GMV–MF ($1078 per DALY Cost of group medical visits averted) were estimated to have lower ICERs than base 95·490 case. Microfinance remained extended dominated. When including recurrent costs of the intervention for Discount rate 10 years, which could be required to maintain reduced 0·048 Proportion of cardiovascular-disease events cardiovascular-disease risk, micro finance was estimated that were strokes to become less expensive than group medical visits due to smaller recurring costs (ICER $4868 per DALY Proportion of fatal strokes averted) and, as a result, dominated group medical visits because it averted 0·001 more DALYs. The ICER Proportion of fatal heart attacks for GMV–MF ($6634 per DALY averted) relative to microfinance instead of group medical visits, was Hazard ratio of non-cardiovascular-disease mortality after previous cardiovascular- estimated to be larger than base case as recurrent costs disease event amplified cost differences. The influence of model parameters on INMBs for non- Cost of stroke dominated interventions for the entire modelled cohort by Expected value: 3·98 sex were examined in the deterministic one-way sensitivity Disability weight of no cardiovascular disease analyses (figure 2). Reduction in QRISK3 scores was estimated to be most influential on INMBs. Group medical –100 –75 –50 –25 0 25 50 75 100 INMB (US$) visits and GMV–MF were estimated to no longer be incrementally cost-effective if QRISK3 scores for group Figure 2: Tornado diagram of the ten most influential model parameters in the base case analysis medical visits were reduced by 46% (–0·177) and if QRISK3 (A) Effects of parameter variation on INMBs, in US$, for group medical visits relative to usual care. (B) Effects of scores for GMV–MF were reduced by 6% (–0·875). parameter variation on INMBs, in US$, for GMV–MF relative to usual care. Bars indicate the range of INMB values corresponding to sensitivity ranges. Grey line indicates base case INMB value. Orange bars indicate when Variations in the remaining model parameters did not parameters are increasing from their base case values. Blue bars indicate when parameters are decreasing from change estimates of base case results for group medical their base case values. GMV–MF=group medical visits and microfinance. INMB=incremental net monetary benefit. visits. However, the cost of GMV–MF relative to group www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1337 Articles visits). These findings suggest that a non-stratified 100 approach to hypertension management could be 90 suboptimal. Although the BIGPIC trial was not powered to detect a difference in intervention effectiveness 80 between male participants and female participants, 70 our results suggest a sex-based implementation strategy could be optimal, which should be an area of 60 future research. An example of a successful gender- based approach is the US Center for Disease Control 50 and Prevention’s WISEWOMAN programme, which 40 expanded the services of existing US federal programmes to improve cardio vascular health in women who were 30 uninsured and had low income and cardiovascular- 20 disease risk factors in 24 US states.29 Through this programme, women at risk of cardiovascular disease 10 could access screening, lifestyle programmes, medi- 0 cation, and referral services. In a 2006 analysis assessing 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 the cost-effectiveness of WISEWOMAN, participants had significantly improved SBP, DBP, and 10-year risk of coronary heart disease.30 Moreover, differentiated service-delivery programmes have been implemented for HIV care in many countries, including Kenya, and medical visits and the discount rate were estimated to be several gender-based models have been implemented.31–33 influential on the cost-effectiveness of GMV–MF relative The benefits of these service-delivery programmes have to group medical visits (appendix pp 15–16). included improved HIV-cascade outcomes (eg, numbers Results from the probabilistic sensitivity analysis were of people screened, on treatment, and with suppressed estimated to be in line with base case (figure 3). At a WTP viral load) and reduced or equivalent cost, among others. threshold less than $1040 per DALY averted (ie, less than Hypertension and HIV care share similarities in that one times GDP per person), usual care was estimated to both require primary-care services and lifelong support; be the intervention most likely to be optimal. However, a similar approach could be considered for hypertension offering group medical visits to only female participants care.31 was cost-effective below this threshold (table 2). When Our analysis was in accordance with the WTP was between $1040 and $3360 per DALY averted CHEERS guideline for reporting uncertainty in economic (ie, within the ranges of one times and two times GDP evaluations,11 which recommends conducting economic per person), group medical visits were estimated to be evaluations even when the primary outcome of interest the intervention most likely to be optimal. GMV–MF was might not be statistically different between groups on estimated to be the intervention most likely to be optimal the basis of a conventional p value cutoff. As a result, above a WTP threshold of $3360 per DALY averted. an intervention can be both cost-effective on the basis of established thresholds of cost per quality-adjusted life- Discussion year gained and not statistically different in terms of the We estimated that integrating group medical visits primary outcome of interest. This approach is consistent and GMV–MF into usual care could be cost-effective with 2019 recommendations to stop using strict p value strategies to control blood pressure in rural Kenya. For cutoffs and focus on the totality of evidence, recognising the entire modelled cohort, group medical visits were that failure to reject the null hypothesis is not estimated to be the optimal strategy when WTP was synonymous with an intervention being ineffective.34 In between $1040 and $3360 per DALY averted. GMV–MF our analysis, we addressed uncertainty with one-way was estimated to be the optimal strategy above a WTP sensitivity analyses and cost-effectiveness acceptability threshold of $3360 per DALY averted. However, at the curves, which incorporated uncertainty in the primary lowest WTP threshold, usual care was estimated to be the outcome and all parameters of interest. Policy makers intervention most likely to be optimal. Our results were should consider both the base case results and sensitivity most sensitive to the extent to which an intervention analyses when interpreting the value of implementing reduced cardiovascular-disease risk. the three BIGPIC interventions. Stratified analyses showed that the estimated cost- BIGPIC focused on promoting access to care by effectiveness of each intervention differed by sex, as improving economic stability, reliance on communities male and female participants had differential benefit as social support, and rural populations. As components (eg, we estimated that male participants benefited from of BIGPIC were integrated into existing public-sector microfinance but did not benefit from group medical health-care infrastructure and relied on local community e1338 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 )%( snoitareti lamitpO Usual care Group medical visits and microfinance Microfinance Group medical visits Willingness to pay (US$ per DALY averted) Figure 3: Cost-effectiveness acceptability curves for the population base case analysis DALY=disability-adjusted life-year. Articles health workers, the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness countries, especially LMICs, apply lower thresholds.50,51 of BIGPIC interventions could be generalisable to rural Whether or not BIGPIC is cost-effective depends both on settings in other LMICs that have similar populations the ICER and the threshold value, a consideration when and public-sector health settings, such as other countries assessing whether to implement the three BIGPIC in Africa. Our approach to group medical visits, interventions in other locations. particularly group-based educational discussions of Our analysis has several strengths. First, intervention chronic-disease management and the provision of costs were tracked prospectively with the activity-based individual clinical sessions with medical staff, are similar costing method, allowing for more accurate cost to other settings, such as the USA.35,36 However, as our estimates. Second, we modelled stroke and heart- results were based on data from Kenya only, particularly attack events, including costs and DALYs, separately in terms of health-care costs, local adaptations will be when estimating the effect of the interventions on required to establish the economic value of implementing cardiovascular-disease events. Third, our model allowed the three BIGPIC interventions in other countries and for repeated cardiovascular-disease events and modelled settings. worsening chronic conditions with each subsequent Our findings focused solely on the estimated costs of event, capturing the effects of the interventions on health benefits of the interventions, but group medical preventing multiple cardiovascular-disease events. visits and microfinance might also confer non-health Finally, our Markov-modelling approach is an improve- benefits. For example, microfinance can result in ment on previous studies46,48 that relied solely on static improved economic wellbeing, increased empowerment relationships between blood-pressure reductions and of female participants, and reduced HIV risk behaviours; DALY improvements. group medical visits can improve trust, social support, There were several limitations in our design, modelling and social cohesion among community members.37–39 assumptions, and analysis. First, although we report Furthermore, microfinance initiatives could improve results by sex and suggest a sex-based implementation access to financial credit for vulnerable populations, such approach, the BIGPIC trial was not powered to detect as people with children,40,41 potentially reducing financial a difference in intervention effectiveness between male barriers and improving health-care access.42 Groups that and female participants. Second, our model assumed aimed to increase appropriate care-seeking, home- a constant hazard rate of having a cardiovascular-disease prevention, and care practices for mothers and newborns event during 10 years. If hazard increased over time, in Bangladesh, India, Malawi, and Nepal were shown to more cardiovascular-disease events would occur later and cost-effectively improve maternal and neonatal mortality be affected by greater discounting than was estimated in and reduce stillbirths.43 In rural Kenya, a group-based the base case analysis. Cost and DALYs associated with parenting intervention to promote early childhood cardiovascular disease would also be lower than was development was also shown to be cost-effective.44 The estimated in the base case analysis, as individuals would integration of both strategies in the form of GMV–MF spend less time in cardiovascular-disease states. These could complement each other and result in further variations would not affect incremental results if the improvements in quality of life. Future analyses will hazard continued in the same away across comparators. need to be conducted to understand the total health, However, if hazards increased more in the intervention economic, and social benefits of these strategies. groups relative to usual care (eg, the benefits of an Our findings were largely consistent with previous intervention were front-loaded and not equally evaluations of hypertension-management interventions distributed across time), ICERs would be lower than base in LMICs. In rural Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka, case ICERs (ie, more cost-effective). Third, assuming home visits and lifestyle monitoring by trained com- that the probability of having a cardiovascular-disease munity health workers, physician training, and public- event did not change from base case during 20 years sector care coordination reduced SBP by 5·2 mm Hg probably underestimated lifetime cardiovascular-disease and were cost-effective in all three countries at risk, as risk is likely to increase over time due to age three times GDP per capita thresholds or less.45,46 In and worsening comorbidities, but the effect on Nepal, a community-based, multicomponent inter- incremental cost-effectiveness is likely to be negligible vention consisting of blood-pressure monitoring and as underestimation applies to all comparators and is lifestyle counselling led by community health workers discounted more heavily than outcomes in analyses with resulted in a reduced mean SBP of 4·9 mm Hg among shorter timeframes, such as the 10-year analysis. Fourth, participants with hypertension, and was cost-effective at due to scarce cost information, we assumed that the cost a threshold of one times the GDP per capita.47,48 Although of hospitalisations for cardiovascular-disease events and differences in implementation and context make direct of chronic cardiovascular-disease management were the comparison difficult, our analysis suggests that the same regardless of the number of cardiovascular-disease three BIGPIC interventions have similar ICERs to these events a participant had. If people who had repeat interventions and are cost-effective according to the WTP cardiovascular-disease events have higher subsequent thesholds of these different countries.49 However, many costs than we estimated in the base case, our ICERs www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1339 Articles would be conservative. Fifth, our analysis was limited to accessed and verified the data. All authors had full access to all data in 10 years. Although modelling for lifetime cardiovascular- the analysis, read and approved the final manuscript, and had final disease risk would have been ideal to capture the responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. full benefits of the three BIGPIC interventions, Declaration of interests We declare no competing interests. cardiovascular-disease risk predictions beyond 10 years are challenging due to changes in risk factors and Data sharing De-identified participant data used in this analysis are available at evolving treatments. When projecting outcomes during https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33888251/. The Bridging Income 20 years, we assumed that annual cardiovascular- Generation with Group Integrated Care trial protocol is available at disease risk was the same as the first 10 years, which https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28577673/. The TreeAge model will probably underestimated lifetime risk. If intervention not be shared. effectiveness is proportional to cardiovascular-disease Acknowledgments risk, increased cardiovascular-disease risk results in The original Bridging Income Generation with Group Integrated Care trial and this analysis were funded by the National Heart, Lung, and increased absolute risk reductions and thus increased Blood Institute of the US National Institutes of Health (award number incremental effectiveness of the intervention. Finally, we R01HL125487). only considered the effect of reduced hypertension on References cardiovascular-disease risk. This assumption is also 1 Prabhakaran D, Anand S, Watkins D, et al. Cardiovascular, conservative, as improved hypertension management respiratory, and related disorders: key messages from Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition. Lancet 2018; 391: 1224–36. also reduces the risk of other chronic diseases that were 2 Mills KT, Bundy JD, Kelly TN, et al. Global disparities of not considered in this analysis. hypertension prevalence and control: a systematic analysis of Although the majority of rural areas in Kenya still have population-based studies from 90 countries. Circulation 2016; 134: 441–50. considerable gaps in terms of health-care resources 3 Mohamed SF, Mutua MK, Wamai R, et al. Prevalence, awareness, and insurance,52 AMPATH was in accordance with the treatment and control of hypertension and their determinants: task-shifted model of chronic-disease management results from a national survey in Kenya. BMC Public Health 2018; 18 (suppl 3): 1219. recommended by the Kenyan Ministry of Health53 and 4 Ogola EN, Barasa F, Barasa AL, et al. May Measurement Month 2017: this work done in partnership with the Kenyan Ministry the results of blood pressure screening of 14 845 individuals in Kenya- of Health.54 Furthermore, with Kenya’s 2023 transition sub-Saharan Africa. Eur Heart J Suppl 2019; 21 (suppl D): D71–73. from the National Hospital Insurance Fund to the Social 5 Attaei MW, Khatib R, McKee M, et al. Availability and affordability of blood pressure-lowering medicines and the effect on blood Health Insurance Fund,55 there could be an opportunity pressure control in high-income, middle-income, and low-income to implement community-centred models, such as countries: an analysis of the PURE study data. Lancet Public Health BIGPIC, in the near future. As chronic-disease 2017; 2: e411–19. 6 Sorato MM, Davari M, Kebriaeezadeh A, Sarrafzadegan N, Shibru T, management and primary-care approaches in public- Fatemi B. Reasons for poor blood pressure control in eastern sector health systems are increasingly being implemented sub-Saharan Africa: looking into 4P’s (primary care, professional, in several countries,56,57 the implications of our analysis patient, and public health policy) for improving blood pressure control: a scoping review. BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2021; 21: 123. are relevant to both current and anticipated future health- 7 Vedanthan R, Kamano JH, Chrysanthopoulou SA, et al. Group system characteristics. medical visit and microfinance intervention for patients with diabetes To our knowledge, ours is the first economic evaluation or hypertension in Kenya. J Am Coll Cardiol 2021; 77: 2007–18. 8 Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare. Care programs. of integrating group medical visits and microfinance 2023. https://www.ampathkenya.org/care-programs (accessed strategies into standard care for individuals with Nov 15, 2023). hypertension in Kenya. Our results suggest that, at 9 African Population and Health Research Center. Kenya national strategy for the prevention and control of non-communicable common thresholds for cost-effectiveness, group medical diseases 2015–2020. 2015. https://aphrc.org/wp-content/ visits and microfinance interventions could be cost- uploads/2019/07/Kenya-National-Strategy-for-NCDs-2015-2020.pdf effective strategies to improve blood-pressure control (accessed June 6, 2022). and reduce morbidity and mortality related to 10 Vedanthan R, Kamano JH, Lee H, et al. Bridging Income Generation with Group Integrated Care for cardiovascular risk cardiovascular disease in rural communities in Kenya. reduction: rationale and design of the BIGPIC study. Am Heart J However, policy makers should consider sex differences 2017; 188: 175–85. in effectiveness when selecting optimal implementation 11 Husereau D, Drummond M, Augustovski F, et al. Consolidated Health Economic Evaluation Reporting Standards (CHEERS) 2022 strategies. explanation and elaboration: a report of the ISPOR CHEERS II good practices task force. Value Health 2022; 25: 10–31. Contributors 12 Palafox B, Goryakin Y, Stuckler D, et al. Does greater individual JC conceptualised and designed this analysis, did the formal analysis, social capital improve the management of hypertension? visualised the data, and wrote the manuscript. RJS did the formal Cross-national analysis of 61 229 individuals in 21 countries. analysis, visualised the data, and wrote the manuscript. JHK acquired BMJ Glob Health 2017; 2: e000443. data and did project administration. BA, GSB, AKD, CRH, DM, RM, 13 Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Brindle P. Development and VO, SDP, and CW were involved in conceptualising, designing, validation of QRISK3 risk prediction algorithms to estimate future implementing the original Bridging Income Generation with Group risk of cardiovascular disease: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2017; Integrated Care (BIGPIC) trial, project administration, and writing for 357: j2099. the Bridging Income Generation with Group Integrated Care trial, and 14 Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. GBD compare. 2020. supervised the writing of this Article. EAF and RV acquired funds for https://www.healthdata.org/data-tools-practices/interactive-visuals/ the original BIGPIC trial and this analysis, conceptualised and designed gbd-compare (accessed Aug 30, 2022). this analysis, and supervised the writing of this Article. RV, JHK, and JC e1340 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 Articles 15 Subramanian S, Gakunga R, Kibachio J, et al. Cost and affordability 35 Cunningham SD, Sutherland RA, Yee CW, et al. Group medical of non-communicable disease screening, diagnosis and treatment care: a systematic review of health service performance. in Kenya: patient payments in the private and public sectors. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021; 18: 12726. PLoS One 2018; 13: e0190113. 36 Edelman D, Frederickson SK, Melnyk SD, et al. Medical clinics 16 Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Burden of versus usual care for patients with both diabetes and Disease Study 2019 (GBD 2019) disability weights. 2020. https:// hypertension: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2010; ghdx.healthdata.org/record/ihme-data/gbd-2019-disability-weights 152: 689–96. (accessed June 6, 2022). 37 Kim JC, Watts CH, Hargreaves JR, et al. Understanding the impact 17 WHO. WHO mortality database. https://www.who.int/data/data- of a microfinance-based intervention on women’s empowerment collection-tools/who-mortality-database (accessed June 6, 2022). and the reduction of intimate partner violence in South Africa. 18 Böhm M, Schumacher H, Teo KK, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes in Am J Public Health 2007; 97: 1794–802. patients at high cardiovascular risk with previous myocardial 38 Pronyk PM, Kim JC, Abramsky T, et al. A combined microfinance infarction or stroke. J Hypertens 2021; 39: 1602–10. and training intervention can reduce HIV risk behaviour in young 19 Bahiru E, Temu T, Gitura B, Farquhar C, Huffman MD, Bukachi F. female participants. AIDS 2008; 22: 1659–65. Presentation, management and outcomes of acute coronary 39 Edelman D, McDuffie JR, Oddone E, Gierisch JM, Nagi A, syndrome: a registry study from Kenyatta National Hospital in Williams JW Jr. Shared medical appointments for chronic medical Nairobi, Kenya. Cardiovasc J S Afr 2018; 29: 225–30. conditions: a systematic review. 2012. https://www.hsrd.research. 20 Kaduka L, Muniu E, Oduor C, et al. Stroke mortality in Kenya’s va.gov/publications/esp/shared-med-appt.pdf (accessed public tertiary hospitals: a prospective facility-based study. June 6, 2022). Cerebrovasc Dis Extra 2018; 8: 70–79. 40 Mengstie B. Impact of microfinance on women’s economic 21 Richman IB, Fairley M, Jørgensen ME, Schuler A, Owens DK, empowerment. J Innov Entrep 2022; 11: 55. Goldhaber-Fiebert JD. Cost-effectiveness of intensive blood pressure 41 Gichuru W, Ojha S, Smith S, Smyth AR, Szatkowski L. Is management. JAMA Cardiol 2016; 1: 872–79. microfinance associated with changes in women’s well-being and 22 Zhang Y, Yin L, Mills K, et al. Cost-effectiveness of a children’s nutrition? A systematic review and meta-analysis. multicomponent intervention for hypertension control in low- BMJ Open 2019; 9: e023658. income settings in Argentina. JAMA Netw Open 2021; 4: e2122559. 42 Jafree SR, Zakar R, Ahsan H, Mustafa M, Fischer F. Impact of 23 Constanti M, Floyd CN, Glover M, Boffa R, Wierzbicki AS, microfinance health interventions on health-related outcomes McManus RJ. Cost-effectiveness of initiating pharmacological among female informal workers in Pakistan: a retrospective quasi- treatment in stage one hypertension based on 10-year cardiovascular experimental study. BMJ Open 2021; 11: e043544. disease risk: a Markov modeling study. Hypertension 2021; 77: 682–91. 43 Prost A, Colbourn T, Seward N, et al. Women’s groups practising 24 Dixon P, Hollinghurst S, Ara R, Edwards L, Foster A, Salisbury C. participatory learning and action to improve maternal and newborn Cost-effectiveness modelling of telehealth for patients with raised health in low-resource settings: a systematic review and meta- cardiovascular disease risk: evidence from a cohort simulation analysis. Lancet 2013; 381: 1736–46. conducted alongside the Healthlines randomised controlled trial. 44 Lopez Garcia I, Saya UY, Luoto JE. Cost-effectiveness and economic BMJ Open 2016; 6: e012355. returns of group-based parenting interventions to promote early 25 Yang W, Gage H, Jackson D, Raats M. The effectiveness and cost- childhood development: results from a randomized controlled trial effectiveness of plant sterol or stanol-enriched functional foods as a in rural Kenya. PLoS Med 2021; 18: e1003746. primary prevention strategy for people with cardiovascular disease 45 Jafar TH, Gandhi M, de Silva HA, et al. A community-based risk in England: a modeling study. Eur J Health Econ 2018; intervention for managing hypertension in rural south Asia. 19: 909–22. N Engl J Med 2020; 382: 717–26. 26 Udpa S. Activity-based costing for hospitals. 1996. https://www. 46 Finkelstein EA, Krishnan A, Naheed A, et al. Budget impact and jstor.org/stable/44950784 (accessed June 6, 2022). cost-effectiveness analyses of the COBRA-BPS multicomponent 27 WHO. Kenya. 2024. https://data.who.int/countries/404 (accessed hypertension management programme in rural communities in May 31, 2024). Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Lancet Glob Health 2021; 28 Briggs A, Sculpher M, Claxton K. Decison modelling for health 9: e660–67. economic evaluation. 2006. https://www.herc.ox.ac.uk/downloads/ 47 Neupane D, McLachlan CS, Mishra SR, et al. Effectiveness of a decision-modelling-for-health-economic-evaluation (accessed lifestyle intervention led by female community health volunteers June 6, 2022). versus usual care in blood pressure reduction (COBIN): an open- 29 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. WISEWOMAN. 2022. label, cluster-randomised trial. Lancet Glob Health 2018; 6: e66–73. https://www.cdc.gov/wisewoman/index.htm (accessed 48 Krishnan A, Finkelstein EA, Kallestrup P, Karki A, Olsen MH, Oct 14, 2023). Neupane D. Cost-effectiveness and budget impact of the 30 Finkelstein EA, Khavjou O, Will JC. Cost-effectiveness of community-based management of hypertension in Nepal study WISEWOMAN, a program aimed at reducing heart disease risk (COBIN): a retrospective analysis. Lancet Glob Health 2019; among low-income women. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 2006; 7: e1367–74. 15: 379–89. 49 Cameron D, Ubels J, Norström F. On what basis are medical cost- 31 Tisdale RL, Cazabon D, Moran AE, Rabkin M, Bygrave H, Cohn J. effectiveness thresholds set? Clashing opinions and an absence of Patient-centered, sustainable hypertension care: the case for data: a systematic review. Glob Health Action 2018; 11: 1447828. adopting a differentiated service delivery model for hypertension 50 Iino H, Hashiguchi M, Hori S. Estimating the range of incremental services in low- and middle-income countries. Glob Heart 2021; cost-effectiveness thresholds for healthcare based on willingness to 16: 59. pay and GDP per capita: a systematic review. PLoS One 2022; 32 Semo B-W, Ezeokafor N, Adeyemi S, Kpamor Z, Mugo C. 17: e0266934. Differentiated service delivery models for antiretroviral treatment 51 Pichon-Riviere A, Drummond M, Palacios A, Garcia-Marti S, refills in Northern Nigeria: experiences of people living with HIV Augustovski F. Determining the efficiency path to universal health and health care providers—a qualitative study. PLoS One 2023; coverage: cost-effectiveness thresholds for 174 countries based on 18: e0287862. growth in life expectancy and health expenditures. 33 University of California San Francisco, Kenya Medical Research Lancet Glob Health 2023; 11: e833–42. Institute. Evaluation Performance Measurement Plan (EPMP) 52 Ammoun R, Wami WM, Otieno P, Schultsz C, Kyobutungi C, report: effectiveness of differentiated service delivery on HIV Asiki G. Readiness of health facilities to deliver non-communicable retention and outcomes in Kisumu County, Kenya. 2021. diseases services in Kenya: a national cross-sectional survey. https://faces.ucsf.edu/sites/g/files/tkssra4711/f/wysiwyg/EPMP. BMC Health Serv Res 2022; 22: 985. Final.Report.Oct2021.pdf (accessed May 31, 2024). 53 Vedanthan R, Kamano JH, Bloomfield GS, Manji I, Pastakia S, 34 Harrington D, D’Agostino RB Sr, Gatsonis C, et al. New guidelines Kimaiyo SN. Engaging the entire care cascade in western Kenya: for statistical reporting in the journal. N Engl J Med 2019; a model to achieve the cardiovascular disease secondary prevention 381: 285–86. roadmap goals. Glob Heart 2015; 10: 313–17. www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1341 Articles 54 Indiana University Center for Global Health Equity. AMPATH 56 Nolte E, Kamano JH, Naanyu V, et al. Scaling up the primary health Kenya. 2024. https://globalhealthequity.iu.edu/impact-map/ integrated care project for chronic conditions in Kenya: study protocol ampath.html (accessed May 31, 2024). for an implementation research project. BMJ Open 2022; 12: e056261. 55 National Assembly of the Republic of Kenya. Kenya gazette 57 Mirza M, Verma M, Aggarwal A, Satpathy S, Sahoo SS, Kakkar R. supplement national assembly bills 2023. 2023. https://kenyalaw. Indian Model of Integrated Healthcare (IMIH): a conceptual org/kl/fileadmin/pdfdownloads/bills/2023/ framework for a coordinated referral system in resource- SocialHealthInsuranceBill2023.pdf (accessed June 6, 2023). constrained settings. BMC Health Serv Res 2024; 24: 42. e1342 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024