Correspondence Delivering safe dengue against infection or disease. 5 years licensure study so that the impact of vaccines after vaccination, in a 10% sample, TAK-003 on severe/hospitalized cases among the 512 children who were due to DENV3 [dengue virus 3] and Unique antigenic and biological vaccinated and seronegative, aged DENV4 may be evaluated. The study attributes of the four dengue viruses 2–16 years, 187 were hospitalised (ie, will be a multi-country, multisite create serious pathogenic problems treated within hospital) with dengue nested case–control study with a for humans. An initial dengue virus viruses 1–4 infections. Among the cohort of 70 000 participants for infection can result in a short-duration, 272 children who received placebos, whom the baseline serostatus will be mild-to-moderate febrile illness only 53 were hospitalised.5 Using determined”.7 followed by an immune response that the attack rate unvaccinated – attack Immense global populations provides lifetime protection against rate vaccinated / attack rate of Aedes aegypti supporting the clinically overt homotypic virus re- unvaccinated × 100 formula, this circulation of the four dengue viruses, infection. The IgG antibodies raised generates a negative vaccine efficacy reinforce the need for vaccines to can interact with a second infecting of 18%. Fortunately, individuals contain dengue transmission. Because dengue virus to produce intrinsic immune to one or more dengue there is no explicit model of a safe antibody-dependent enhancement, viruses when vaccinated were and effective tetravalent protective the process by which dengue viruses protected from breakthrough dengue dengue virus vaccine, commercial IgG immune complexes suppress virus infections and disease. This is manufacturers have relied on empirical intracellular antiviral defenses.1,2 good news, as dengue virus mono- products. Why not use clinical Antibody-dependent enhancement immunes contribute importantly to trial data to better understand the generates increased production of those at risk of severe dengue. correlates of dengue vaccine success or the dengue virus’s non-structural In Takeda’s recent 4–5-year QDENGA failure? Notably, DENGVAXIA lacked protein, NS1, an endothelial toxin efficacy report (February, 2024),6 of dengue virus non-structural genes. that circulates to cause vascular 3174 patients who were vaccinated Surprisingly, QDENGA is expected permeability and other abnormalities and seronegative aged 4–16 years, to provide protection when three of contributing to severe, sometimes 11 were hospitalised with dengue its dengue virus constructs lack non- fatal, dengue.3 Unfortunately, the virus 3 infections, while among structural antigens. The vaccine does mechanisms of immune protection 1832 patients who were seronegative contain a classical, protective live- against dengue virus infection, in and given placebos only three were attenuated dengue virus 2. Should particular, the contributions of cellular hospitalised.6 This generates a wider clinical testing of candidate immunity are not fully understood.4 negative efficacy of 11·6%, similar to dengue vaccines that contain all four The four different dengue viruses that of the Sanofi vaccine. The major dengue viruses structural and non- result in pathogenic second infections difference between the two studies structural proteins not be looked and in 12 different infection sequences. is the small scale of Takeda clinical promoted? Perhaps, there should be Regretfully, new pathogenic sequences dengue virus 3 cases. Overt dengue wider testing of the National Institutes of dengue virus infection have virus 4 infections were also rare. of Health dengue vaccine—a product been discovered: Sanofi Pasteur’s The Strategic Advisory Group of composed of three live attenuated DENGVAXIA vaccine followed by Experts on Immunization’s recent dengue viruses, missing only an infection with any of the four dengue recommendation for the use of attenuated dengue virus 2.8 viruses, and—possibly—Takeda’s QDENGA is that in dengue virus- I declare no competing interests. QDENGA vaccine followed by infection endemic countries in settings of high Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by with dengue virus 3.5,6 transmission, vaccines should be given Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the What makes sensitisation to severe to children aged 6–16 years regardless CC BY 4.0 license. secondary dengue infections by of serostatus.7 Citing an absence of Scott B Halstead tetravalent dengue vaccines possible? a statistically significant number of halsteads@erols.com DENGVAXIA contains structural severe dengue 3 infections in patients Westwood, MA 02090, USA but no non-structural genes for any vaccinated with QDENGA who are 1 Halstead SB, Mahalingam S, Marovich MA, dengue virus. Thanks to the large seronegative, the report noted Takeda’s Ubol S, Mosser DM. Intrinsic antibody- datasets generated by Sanofi Pasteur’s plans to conduct an extensive “post- dependent enhancement of microbial infection in macrophages: disease regulation efficacy trials, humans who are authorization effectiveness study… to by immune complexes. Lancet Infect Dis 2010; seronegative and given three doses assess the impact of TAK-003 against 10: 712–22. of DENGVAXIA were seen to develop hospitalized dengue. The planned 2 Ubol S, Halstead SB. How innate immune mechanisms contribute to antibody-enhanced neutralising antibodies to all four trial size and locations are intended viral infections. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2010; dengue viruses but little protection to overcome limitations in the pivotal 17: 1829–35. www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1229 Correspondence 3 Glasner DR, Puerta-Guardo H, Beatty PR, Harris E. The good, the bad, and the shocking: the multiple roles of dengue virus nonstructural protein 1 in protection and pathogenesis. Annu Rev Virol 2018; 5: 227–53. 4 Tian Y, Grifoni A, Sette A, Weiskopf D, Human T. Human T cell response to dengue virus infection. Front Immunol 2019; 10: 2125. 5 Sridhar S, Luedtke A, Langevin E, et al. Effect of dengue serostatus on dengue vaccine safety and efficacy. N Engl J Med 2018; 379: 327–40. 6 Tricou V, Yu D, Reynales H, et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of a tetravalent dengue vaccine (TAK-003): 4·5-year results from a phase 3, randomised, double-blind, placebo- controlled trial. Lancet Glob Health 2024; 12: e257–70. 7 WHO. WHO position paper on dengue vaccines—May 2024. Wkly Epidemiol Rec 2024; 99: 203–24. 8 Nivarthi UK, Swanstrom J, Delacruz MJ, et al. A tetravalent live attenuated dengue virus vaccine stimulates balanced immunity to multiple serotypes in humans. Nat Commun 2021; 12: 1102. e1230 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024