Build a Healthy Eating Routine You know that healthy eating is key to a healthy life — and the good news is that small changes can make a big difference! Follow these tips to build a healthy eating routine that works for you. Choose a mix of healthy foods There are lots of healthy choices in each food group! Choose a variety of foods you enjoy, including: Whole fruits — like Veggies — like apples, berries, broccoli, sweet grapefruit, papaya, potatoes, beets, okra, and bananas spinach, peppers, and jicama Whole grains — like Proteins — like lean brown rice, millet, meats and chicken, oatmeal, bulgur, and eggs, seafood, beans whole-wheat bread and lentils, nuts and seeds, and tofu Low-fat or fat-free Oils — like vegetable dairy — like milk, oil, olive oil, and oils yogurt, cheese, in foods like seafood, lactose-free dairy, and avocado, and nuts fortified soy beverages (soy milk) or soy yogurt Depending on your culture and tastes, you might choose different foods than the ones listed here — and that’s okay! You can find healthy foods that work for you. 1 Cut down on added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium Check the Nutrition Facts label to buy foods with less of these 3 things: • Added sugars are sweeteners with calories that food companies add to foods and drinks — or that you add at home. Choose water instead of sugary drinks and limit sweet treats like cake, cookies, and candy. • Choose whole grains Saturated fat is higher in animal foods like butter, cheese, whole milk, and fatty meats like ribs and Whole grains are a healthier choice sausage. It’s also in some plant foods like coconut oil than refined grains. Try: and palm oil. Choose foods with unsaturated fats instead • Whole-wheat bread instead of — like seafood, avocados, nuts and seeds, and olive oil. white bread • Sodium comes from salt — and most of the sodium we • Corn or whole-wheat tortillas eat comes from packaged foods and restaurant meals. instead of white flour tortillas Try cooking more at home and flavoring foods with herbs • Plain popcorn instead of and spices instead of salt. corn chips Get a mix of veggies What about alcohol? Make half your plate fruits and If you choose to drink alcohol, drink in veggies — and eat a variety of moderation — 1 drink or less in a day for veggie types, including: women and 2 drinks or less in a day for • Dark green veggies — men. Remember, drinking less is better for like collards and kale your health. And if you’re pregnant, don’t drink • Red and orange veggies — at all — alcohol is not safe for your baby. like tomatoes and carrots • Beans, peas, and lentils — like black beans and chickpeas • Starchy veggies — like potatoes and plantains • Other veggies — like Brussels sprouts, squash, and cauliflower 2 Find out how many calories you need The number of calories you need each day depends on things like your age, weight, height, sex, and how much physical activity you get. Use the MyPlate Plan tool to find out how many calories you need — and the amount of food you need from each food group: MyPlate.gov/MyPlate-Plan Check the label The Nutrition Facts label can help you make healthier choices. Look for this key info: • Serving size — if you eat more than 1 serving, you’ll get more of everything on the label • Calories — keep in mind how many calories you need each day, and how many are in 1 serving Then look at the % Daily Values: • 5% or less is low — try to choose foods low in added sugars, saturated fat, and sodium • 20% or more is high — try to choose foods high in fiber, calcium, potassium, iron, and vitamin D What about taking supplements? Most people can get all the nutrients they need from food, but you might need to take a vitamin or another supplement. For example, some people don’t get enough vitamin D from food and sunlight. Talk with your doctor before you start taking any supplements. 3 Make healthy eating work for your schedule — and your budget • Too busy to cook? Try planning and prepping meals ahead of time. Making a big batch of soup or chopping a bunch of veggies on the weekend can save time during the week. • Worried about cost? Try buying fruits and veggies that are in season — and remember that fresh, frozen, and canned options all count. If you can’t afford enough healthy food, check out programs that can help at USA.gov/Food-Help. Not sure where to start? Try cooking a healthy dinner just once a week. Cooking more at home is a great way to start making healthier choices. Remember, it’s never too late to start eating healthy Healthy eating can lower your risk of health problems like: • Overweight and obesity • Heart disease • Type 2 diabetes • Some cancers And there’s no one “right” way to do it! You can find an eating routine that works for you, no matter your age, income, lifestyle, culture, or tastes. So start simple — make a small change in your eating routine today. • Learn about the Dietary Guidelines for Americans and get more resources to help you eat healthy at DietaryGuidelines.gov • Find more healthy eating tips and recipes at MyPlate.gov Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion 4