Comment Epilepsy prevalence studies and the lingering treatment gap in Africa Epilepsy is an important cause of morbidity in low- identified more patients with generalised as well as non- Published Online income and middle-income countries, especially convulsive epilepsy, contrary to what has been reported July 5, 2024 https://doi.org/10.1016/ in sub-Saharan Africa, but large-scale community- from older studies.1 Re-classification notwithstanding, S2214-109X(24)00272-9 based prevalence studies are few.1 The study by one wonders whether it is time to re-examine African See Articles page e1323 Daniel M Mwanga and colleagues2 has uniquely sought and other populations, where symptomatic contributors to determine the prevalence of epilepsy in an African to epilepsy seem to be less prevalent than half a century urban setting; previous studies in the region have ago. Investigators engaging with select populations in focused on active convulsive epilepsy in rural areas Nairobi have reported predominantly normal imaging which have different disease determinants.3 East Africa for patients with epilepsy, unlike what had been is rapidly urbanising with a young population, with reported earlier in studies from Kilifi.6 Nairobi being one of the largest growing cities, yet Secondly, this study included children and adolescents, no prevalence studies have been reported until now. thus providing important insights into the possible Housing developments have been slow, leading to the factors driving the onset of epilepsy, as a significant emergence of many informal urban settlements that proportion of epilepsy in adulthood has an onset in carry their own socio-economic characteristics and childhood. Advocating for effective management of determinants of epilepsy. epilepsy in childhood will have a positive effect on Understanding the contribution and counter-effects of adults, including for economic and social outcomes. epilepsy on individuals living in these settings is crucial Thirdly and most notably, this study elaborates in shaping appropriate interventions at many levels: further on the treatment gap for people living with public health, infrastructure for health-care access, and epilepsy in Africa: 80% first received their diagnosis socio-demographic inequalities such as education and through the study alone. Although there has been a employment rates. This study identifies these factors and lot of previous work to try and close this gap when provides findings that are unique to informal settlements identified decades ago,7 this study is a stark reminder when compared with similar studies from elsewhere in that such efforts have not reached under-served and Africa. For example, it expounds on adults with epilepsy under-recognised populations. Continent-specific and being more likely to be divorced or separated and hence country-specific approaches need to be established being less likely to have consistent social support. urgently, and the Intersectoral Global Action Plan report The study methodology employed is robust because provides necessary frameworks to achieve these.8 it utilises an initial census approach using a well- Increasing the health-care workforce is an important validated screening tool within a defined demographic but resource heavy solution: there are only a handful of surveillance site,4 followed by diagnostic confirmation post-graduate training programmes in neurology in East by experienced practitioners. It also demonstrates Africa, which help to train neurology specialists in the that non-neurologist physicians can be supervised and long run but cannot address the urgent need for now. trained to identify epilepsy, a model that can be used to Awareness of epilepsy diagnosis should be a part of the address the dearth of neurologists and epileptologists in training for clinical officers (health-care workers who are East Africa (there are less than 30 neurologists in Kenya equivalent to physician associates who have undergone for a population of 50 million5). In the same view, we abbreviated medical training and are the main senior have few facilities for electroencephalography (EEG); clinical decision-makers in the Kenyan primary health- the authors modestly mention the suboptimal usage of care system). However, adherence to epilepsy treatment EEG as a limitation, but we believe it is a strength as it guidelines and access to medicines remain barriers to re-emphasises epilepsy as a clinical diagnosis. providing adequate support for people with epilepsy. The This study adds value in many ways to what is advancement of communication technology in Kenya already known about epilepsy in the country. Firstly, it makes telehealth an essential solution to help address www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1221 Comment these gaps: the authors have eluded to their screening 1 Beghi E. The epidemiology of epilepsy. Neuroepidemiology 2020; 54: 185–91. survey “app”,4 and studies in Kenya have demonstrated 2 Mwanga DM, Kadengye DT, Otieno PO, et al. Prevalence of all epilepsies in urban informal settlements in Nairobi, Kenya: a two-stage population- that teleconsultations are acceptable and effective for based study. Lancet Glob Health 2024; published online July 5. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(24)00217-1. managing patients with neurological conditions.9 3 Kariuki SM, Matuja W, Akpalu A, et al. Clinical features, proximate causes, We applaud the authors for conducting this timely and and consequences of active convulsive epilepsy in Africa. Epilepsia 2014; 55: 76–85. instructive community-based study, the first of its kind 4 Jones GD, Kariuki SM, Ngugi AK, et al. Development and validation of a in Nairobi. The findings have provided a foundation for diagnostic aid for convulsive epilepsy in sub-Saharan Africa: a retrospective case-control study. Lancet Digit Health 2023; 5: e185–93. future public health interventions in such settings in 5 Kissani N, Liqali L, Hakimi K, et al. Why does Africa have the lowest number Africa. of neurologists and how to cover the gap? J Neurol Sci 2022; 434: 120119. 6 Samia P, Odero N, Njoroge M, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging findings DSS has received honararia and study sponsorship from Hoffmann-La Roche, in childhood epilepsy at a tertiary hospital in Kenya. Front Neurol 2021; which are unrelated to the topics covered in this Comment. PS declares no 12: 623960. competing interests. 7 Meinardi H, Scott RA, Reis R, Sander JW, World ICotD. The treatment gap in epilepsy: the current situation and ways forward. Epilepsia 2001; Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 42: 136–49. Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. 8 Grisold W, Freedman M, Gouider R, et al. The Intersectoral Global Action *Dilraj Singh Sokhi, Pauline Samia Plan (IGAP): a unique opportunity for neurology across the globe. J Neurol Sci 2023; 449: 120645. Dilraj.Sokhi@aku.edu 9 Yakub FA, Shah J, Sokhi DS. High acceptability, convenience and reduced Department of Medicine (DSS) and Deparment of Paediatrics and Child Health carbon emissions of tele-neurology outpatient services at a regional referral centre in Kenya. eNeurologicalSci 2023; 33: 100484. (PS), Aga Khan University Medical College of East Africa, Nairobi 00100, Kenya e1222 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024