® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS FUELING ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE VISIT GSSIWEB.ORG FOR MORE ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS Endurance athletes who are serious about their performance and are competing in events such as marathons, triathlons, cross-country skiing, cycling and swimming should focus on the foods and fluids they consume. Not only do the right fuels and fluids help the athlete to perform at their best on race day, they also can get the most out of their training for the big event. PRE-PRACTICE OR GAME FOODS & FLUIDS Eating before an endurance event helps top off the body’s carbohydrate stores (called glycogen), especially if the training or race is in the morning. The pre-event meal should be eaten 1-4 hours before exercise, contain 1-4 g/kg body weight of carbohydrate, and be low in protein, fiber, and fat to minimize the risk of gastrointestinal upset. The exact timing and amount of carbohydrate consumed during this time should be determined by the individual preferences of the athlete.1 Additionally, it is recommended that athletes drink ~5-7 mL/kg body weight of fluids with sodium approximately 4 hours prior to a training session or race, and another 3-5 mL/kg body weight about 2 hours prior if the athlete does not urinate, or if the urine is dark in color.2,3 Daily carbohydrate and protein needs are shown in the table below. Both depend on the intensity of the training period. Information on newer research related to the periodization of carbohydrate during training can be found in SSE #134, Manipulating Carbohydrate Availability to Promote Training Adaptations by Dr. John Hawley at GSSIweb.org. SUGGESTED DAILY MACRONUTRIENT INTAKE (PER KILOGRAM BODY WEIGHT) Macronutrient Intake Amount Carbohydrate1,4 During training (moderate to high intensity, 1-3 hours/day) 6-10 g/kg/day During training (moderate to high intensity, > 4-5 hours/day) 8-12 g/kg/day Same as needs during Preparation for events < 90 min training (above values) 10-12 g/kg for 36-48 h Preparation for events > 90 min (carbohydrate loading) prior to event Protein4 1.2-2.0 g/kg/day 2 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS SAMPLE PRE-TRAINING/RACE MEALS PRE-TRAINING & RACE (Examples for a 140 lb [64 kg] athlete) FOODS & FLUIDS Menu #1 • Success in endurance events is related to adequate (~4 hours prior, target ~4 g/kg, 256 g carbohydrate) carbohydrate energy to fuel muscles. • The nutritional focus before training and racing • Penne pasta (2 cups cooked) with for endurance athletes is to consume adequate 1 cup marinara sauce carbohydrate and fluids. Minimize protein, fiber, and fat before training and racing. • Medium piece French bread (~4 oz) • Athletes are individual and should use the • 16 oz orange juice recommendations to help them determine the right amount and time to eat carbohydrate prior to training • 1 cup vanilla fat-free pudding (not sugar free!) and racing that works for them. with 1 cup sliced strawberries Totals: 1,286 calories, 256 g carbohydrate, 9 g fat, 31 g protein, 11 g fiber DURING-PRACTICE OR GAME FOODS & FLUIDS Menu #2 DEHYDRATION (~3 hours prior, target ~3 g/kg, 192 g carbohydrate) Dehydration of a 2% or more decrease in body weight (approximately a ~2.8 lb loss in a 140 lb athlete) may • Turkey sandwich negatively affect an athlete’s performance, especially • 3 oz fat-free deli turkey when exercising in hot and humid conditions.3,4 • Mustard/low-fat mayo (use sparingly) Answering “yes” to any of these questions may indicate • Plain bagel inadequate hydration: • ~40 tiny twist pretzels • Am I thirsty? • 1 large apple • Is my urine a dark yellow color? • 2 fig cookies • Is my body weight noticeably lower than yesterday? • 20 oz Gatorade Endurance Formula IMPORTANCE OF HYDRATION Totals: 890 calories, 189 g carbohydrate, 5.5 g fat, Endurance athletes spend several hours each day 29 g protein, 9.5 g fiber training—often twice a day—so paying attention to Menu #3 hydration is important. Athletes should be sure to drink (~2 hours prior, target ~2 g/kg, 228 g carbohydrate) enough fluid to prevent dehydration without over-drinking. Dehydration may strain the cardiovascular system and • 1 bakery-size bagel with 2 tsp low-fat cream cheese increase body temperature, which increases the risk of • 1 large banana heat illness. However, endurance athletes who over-drink • 20 oz Gatorade Endurance Formula in relation to sweating could be at risk for a rare but very serious condition called hyponatremia (low blood sodium Totals: 550 calories, 125 g carbohydrate, 3.5 g fat, concentration).3 Consuming beverages with sodium during 11 g protein, 5 g fiber exercise may help maintain blood sodium levels.3 Ingesting carbohydrate within the hour prior to training HYDRATE THE RIGHT WAY or racing essentially begins to meet the athlete’s during- At lower levels of dehydration, drinking when thirsty may exercise fueling needs,5 and may also help the athlete be an appropriate approach for some athletes. However, decrease feelings of hunger. The amount and form of thirst is affected by many factors that are not dependent on carbohydrate, such as a beverage, chew or solid food, is dehydration. Also, at the time an athlete is thirsty, they might the individual choice of the athlete. 3 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS not have access to fluids. Developing a hydration plan DURING-TRAINING & RACING allows the athlete to practice their strategy to help ensure FOODS & FLUIDS they remain hydrated while focused on the competition. • Athletes should determine their individual sweat rate and To determine individual sweat rate, measure body consume fluids with sodium to minimize body weight changes during training and racing. weight before and after a training session, in the same environment as the race and keep track of all the fluid • Recommendations for carbohydrate intake during exercise are based on duration of exercise, consumed. A rough estimate of sweat rate can be obtained not intensity. by using the following equation: Sweat Rate (L/h) = (weight • Mix and match products to find the right combination loss (lbs) + fluid intake (L))/ exercise time (hours). Reference of solids and fluids to meet both carbohydrate and Sweat Calculator Worksheet on Page 10. fluid needs. • It is possible to train the gut! If athletes are currently SODIUM consuming less than the recommendations, gradually Athletes sweat, and that sweat contains sodium. increase intake to minimize gastrointestinal issues. Endurance athletes, especially when training or racing >2h or those who have high sweat losses, should replace both POST-TRAINING AND RACING FOODS AND FLUIDS fluid and sodium during exercise.3 To estimate if an athlete Restoring the carbohydrate used from the muscle and is a “salty sweater,” look for white residue on dark-colored liver is a key focus of the post-exercise fueling needs clothing after a training session. The Gatorade Gx sweat of endurance athletes. When athletes have <8 hours patch is a commercially available, scientifically validated, between training sessions, 1.0-1.2 g/kg carbohydrate single-use patch that can be used to determine sweat rate should be consumed every hour for 4 hours. When and sweat sodium losses.5 Gatorade Endurance Formula athletes have >8 hours between sessions, they should contains 310 mg sodium per 12 oz serving. For athletes follow daily carbohydrate needs of an endurance athlete who need higher amounts of sodium or are prone to (6-10 g/kg/day) and choose carbohydrate-rich meals and cramping, Gatorade Endurance Gatorlytes (one sachet) snacks in a pattern that works for them.1,4 can provide an additional 780 mg sodium. Consuming protein to start the recovery process as soon TIPS FOR HYDRATION as possible after each training session helps to repair • Know your sweat rate to customize a plan to meet damaged muscle tissue as well as adapt to the demands your unique needs. of training. Additionally, if inadequate carbohydrate is consumed, protein can help accelerate glycogen • Practice your race strategy in training and make sure repletion.4 Athletes should choose a high-quality, you can tolerate the fluids without problems. complete protein such as milk protein, whey, egg or • Use sports drinks to provide fluid and electrolytes. meat. However, while research has shown post-exercise protein to be important to stimulate synthesis of new CARBOHYDRATE proteins following aerobic exercise, the effective amount Consuming carbohydrate during exercise provides fuel has only been confirmed following resistance exercise. to both the muscles and nervous system.1 For shorter Based on that information, endurance athletes should durations, the presence of carbohydrate in the mouth is aim to consume about 20 g or 0.25-0.30 g/kg, of protein adequate as a mechanism to improve higher-intensity shortly after training sessions.4,10 Research is emerging on performance.2 The longer the duration of exercise, the the use of plant-based proteins for recovery and muscle more important ingested carbohydrate becomes to help gain. Athletes consuming plant-based proteins should maintain higher-intensity performance.7 For bouts lasting ensure they are eating a variety of foods in order to meet greater than 2.5 hours, athletes should consume a blend of their essential amino acid needs to support recovery and carbohydrates that take advantage of the multiple transport training adaptations.11 systems in the intestine. Specifically, the carbohydrate blend should consist of a 2:1 ratio of glucose to fructose.4,8 Following exercise, athletes should drink 20-24 oz per Glucose may come from sources such as maltodextrin.9 pound of body weight lost of fluid with sodium.3,4 4 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS RECOMMENDED CARBOHYDRATE EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INTAKE DURING ENDURANCE EXERCISE4 COMBINATIONS TO ACHIEVE UP TO 30, 60, OR 90 G/HOUR Carbohydrate Duration Notes Amount Total Examples Carbohydrate (g) < 30 minutes None required Very small Mouthrinse 30-75 minutes 48 fl oz G2 30 amounts appropriate Rapidly used sources such as sucrose, 1-2.5 hours 30-60 g/h glucose, and maltodextrin 24 fl oz G2 + 1 Gatorade 36 Endurance Energy Gel Use a blend of > 2.5-3 hours Up to 90 g/h glucose & fructose 34 fl oz (1 L) G2 + 1 Gatorade SODIUM AND CARBOHYDRATE 42 Endurance Energy Gel CONTENT OF GATORADE PRODUCTS Serving Size Carbohydrate Sodium 34 fl oz (1 L) Gatorade Thirst Gatorade Quencher OR 34 fl oz Gatorade 60 Endurance 12 oz 22 g 310 mg Endurance Formula Formula Gatorade 24 fl oz Gatorade Thirst Quencher Thirst 12 oz 21 g 160 mg OR 24 fl oz Gatorade Endurance Quencher 65 Formula + 1 Gatorade Endurance Energy Gel G2 12 oz 8 g 160 mg 24 fl oz Gatorade Thirst Quencher Gatorade OR 24 fl oz Gatorade Endurance Endurance 1 packet 20 g 100 mg 84 Formula + 2 Gatorade Endurance Energy Gels Energy Gels Gatorlyte 12 oz 8 g 300 mg RTD 34 fl oz (1 L) Gatorade Thirst Quencher OR 34 fl oz Gatorade Gatorlytes 82 1 packet 0 g 780 mg Endurance Formula + 1 Gatorade powder* Endurance Energy Gel G Zero 12 oz 0 g 160 mg 24 fl oz Gatorade Endurance Formula 64 + 1 Gatorade Endurance Energy Gel * Gatorlytes are not a beverage. They are a packet of electrolytes to be added to a 20 oz bottle of Gatorade Thirst Quencher. * These suggestions are to fulfill carbohydrate recommendations. Remember to supplement with water to also meet fluid needs if necessary. 5 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS RECOVERY FOOD OPTIONS Calories Carbohydrate (g) Fiber (g) Protein (g) Fat (g) Sodium (mg) Option 1 270 45 1 20 1.5 320 Gatorade Protein Recovery Shake Option 2 Evolve plant-based protein powder 160 21 10 20 2.5 380 mixed with water Option 3 Fruit & Yogurt Smoothie 293 51 7 24 0 445 (5oz plain non-fat greek yogurt, 1 cup skim milk, 3/4 cup frozen mixed berries) Option 4 Egg Sandwich 380 49 4 22 12 625 (plain bagel, 1 egg, 1 slice 2% swiss cheese) POST-TRAINING & RACING FOODS & FLUIDS • Restore carbohydrate after training sessions and racing to replace used glycogen (carbohydrate stored in the muscle and liver) and to store more glycogen as an adaptation to training. • Endurance athletes should consume ~20 g, or 0.25-0.3 g/kg of high-quality protein as soon as possible following training or racing to help repair muscle tissue. • Rehydrate with 20-24 oz of fluid with sodium for every pound of body weight lost during exercise. 6 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS 7 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS AI N EXAMPLE: PUTTING BEFORE EXERCISE THE SCIENCE-BASED Katie plans her training runs on Sunday mornings, and is willing to wake up two hours prior to eat breakfast. We first RECOMMENDATIONS suggested 2.5 g carbohydrate/kg body weight, but she INTO PRACTICE felt too full, so we backed down to 2 g/kg and that amount worked well for her stomach. As a result, the carbohydrate goal for her pre-run meal is 116 g (464 calories). Katie does not like to cook in the morning, and also wants to train with a meal she can travel with and eat before the race. Incorporating Katie’s favorite foods, and aiming for a meal low in fiber, protein, and fat, her pre-run meal is: plain bagel with 1 tablespoon strawberry jelly, one small box raisins (~1/4 cup), 12 oz Gatorade Endurance Formula, water as needed (~480 calories, 111 g carbohydrate, 2 g fiber, 9 g protein, and 1 g fat). Katie doesn’t like to have too much in her stomach right before the race, but does feel the need for some energy, so we suggest one 6 oz Gatorade Endurance Formula plus one sleeve of Gatorade Energy Chews to give her a small amount of carbohydrate. During training she will experiment with taking it 5, 10, and 15 minutes before her run to determine what timing works best for her. DURING EXERCISE In training for marathons in the past, Katie would carry 2 gels with her on long training runs and find water fountains along the way. Since her training runs will take ~2.5 hours, two gels (~60 g total carbohydrate) doesn’t come close to meeting the recommendation of up to 90 g per hour. We don’t want her to immediately start consuming 90 g/hour and upset her stomach, so we will ATHLETE PROFILE gradually increase and train her stomach to be ready for that amount on her long training runs. Name: Katie In terms of fluid, Katie has never figured out her sweat Age: 30 rate. Luckily Katie lives in Chicago, so her training climate Weight: 128 lbs (58 kg) will be similar to Boston. On a 13-mile run, we had her weigh herself immediately before in minimal clothing, Type of athlete: Competitive Female Marathon Runner and again immediately after in the same clothing, wiping off excess sweat. We also had her carry fluid on the run Goal: To PR at the Boston Marathon, goal time 3:15 and measure how much she drank. Katie lost 1.5 lbs and Purpose of consultation: Katie is beginning her drank 20 oz of fluid during a 100-minute run. Therefore, training for the Boston Marathon, and would like to her sweat rate is 0.8 L/h or 26 oz/hour. Also, during this develop a fueling plan specifically for before, during, run, we had Katie wear dark-colored clothing. There was and after her 20+ mile training runs, which will mimic minimal evidence of salt on her clothes, and her race day plan. 8 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS she doesn’t report a history of cramping, so higher sodium REFERENCES levels are likely not needed. 1. Burke L, Hawley J, Wong S, Jeukendrup A. (2011) Carbohydrates for training and competition. J Sports Sci. 29 (Suppl 1):S17-27. For her 20-mile training runs and the race, to meet her 2. Sawka MN, Burke L M, Eichner ER, Maughan RJ, Montain SJ, fluid and carbohydrate energy needs, we recommend Stachenfeld NS. (2007) American College of Sports Medicine position stand: Exercise and fluid replacement. Med Sci Sports 24 oz of Gatorade Endurance Formula and 2 Gatorade Exerc. 39:377–390. Endurance Energy Gels per hour (84 g carbohydrate, 3. Shirreffs S. & Sawka M. (2011) Fluid and electrolyte needs for training, competition, and recovery. J Sports Sci. 29 (Suppl 24 oz fluid, 820 mg sodium per hour). 1):S39-46. 4. Thomas DT, Erdman KA, Burke LM. (2016) American College of AFTER EXERCISE Sports Medicine Joint Position Statement. Nutrition and Athletic Performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 48:543-568. During training for past marathons, Katie often didn’t 5. Baker LB, Model JB, Barnes KA, Anderson ML, Lee SP, Lee KA, feel great in her next training sessions after a long run, Brown SD, Reimel AJ, Roberts TJ, Nuccio RP, Bonsignore JL, Ungaro CT, Carter JM, Li W, Seib MS, Reeder JT, Aranyosi AJ, and she never paid very much attention to what she Rogers JA, Ghaffari R. (2020) Skin-interfaced microfluidic system ate after a run. We helped her understand that recovery with personalized sweating rate and sweat chloride analytics for sports science applications. Sc Adv. 6:eabe3929. nutrition is important so she can stay strong throughout 6. Moore DR. (2015) Nutrition to support recovery from endurance her training and get the most out of every run, as well exercise: optimal carbohydrate and protein replacement. Curr Sports Med Rep. 14:294-300. as maximize training adaptations, such as the ability to 7. Hawley JA & Leckey JJ. (2015) Carbohydrate dependence during store more carbohydrate as muscle glycogen. Katie is prolonged, intense endurance exercise. Sports Med. 45 (Suppl 1):S5-12. hungry after her long training runs, but doesn’t feel like 8. Fuchs CJ, Gonzalez JT, Van Loon LJC. (2019) Fructose -ingestion her stomach can easily accept food. Gatorade Recover to increase carbohydrate availability in athletes. J Physiol. Protein Shake will be available at the finish line, so we 597:3549-3560. recommend she use that product in her training (after hard 9. Jeukendrup A. (2011) Nutrition for endurance sports: marathon, triathlon, and road cycling. J Sports Sci. 29 (Suppl 1):S91-99. or long workouts) as well to get carbohydrate, protein and 10. Phillips S & Van Loon L. (2011) Dietary protein for athletes: from electrolytes shortly after she finishes to start the recovery requirements to optimum adaptation. J Sports Sci. 29 (Suppl 1):S29-38. process. Then, after she showers, rests and feels like she 11. Pinckaers P, Trommelen J, Snijders T, van Loon LJC. (2021) The can eat solid food again, she can have a meal. Since she anabolic response to plant-based protein ingestion. Sports Med. 51 (suppl 1):59-74. always takes a day off after the long training runs, the timing of the meal is not crucial, but should be high in carbohydrate, moderate in protein, and low in fiber and fat, helping to meet the daily recommendation of 6-10 g/ kg/day (for Katie, 348 - 580 g, or 1392 - 2320 calories from carbohydrate per day). Katie’s favorite meal after a long run is a burrito, so we helped her craft an appropriate “recovery burrito” with rice, black beans, chicken, lettuce, tomato and a small amount of cheese. Hopefully with our fluid intake plan during exercise, Katie will lose minimal weight during her run. However, we encouraged Katie to always weigh herself before and after long runs, and to drink ~20-24 oz of fluid with sodium (or drink water with sodium-containing food) for every pound she lost. The amount of weight she loses each time will depend on a number of factors, so tracking weight changes is the best habit she can adopt to make sure she is getting what she needs. 9 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS CALCULATIONS/YOUR WORKSHEET 10 ® FOODS & FLUIDS FOR ENDURANCE SPORTS 11 ® FUELING ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE VISIT GSSIWEB.ORG FOR MORE