Exercising While Pregnant Susan Connelly Freyder, MS, PT' Current literature on exercise and pregnancy was reviewed. Normal anatomic and physiological changes of pregnancy are briefly outlined. Benefits of maternal exercise experienced by the mother and fetus have been reported by some researchers. Other researchers have documented respiratory and cardiovascular changes peculiar to exercise during pregnancy. Effects on the fetus are also discussed. Guidelines for exercise during pregnancy are discussed with recommendations for health professionals caring for pregnant women. It is concluded that exercise during pregnancy can be safe if common sense is used and guidelines are followed. With an increase in the number of women the center of gravity were it not for the body participating in regular exercise, more women are compensating with an increase in the lumbar asking about continuing, or even initiating, activi- lordosis and forward tilt of the pelvis (I), thus shifting the center of gravity back over the pelvis ties while pregnant. While some women asking to prevent falling forward. Increased thoracic ky- this question are professional athletes partaking phosis and forward head posture may result to in a high level of activity, the majority are recrea- compensate for the lumbar lordosis and increased tional athletes concerned about their health and breast mass (1 3). The instability of this new pos- the health of the fetus. Studies have identified ture results in a wide-based, "waddling" gait. Such various maternal and fetal responses to exercise; rapid changes in posture often cause low back however, further study is needed in many areas discomfort and make tasks such as walking, turn- before conclusions can be reached concerning ing, lifting, stooping, and throwing more difficult the amount, level, and type of exercise which is (1 1). safe and perhaps beneficial for both mother and fetus. This paper is designed to review the current lncreased Body Fluid literature on the maternal and fetal effects of The average woman gains approximately 8.5 exercise during pregnancy, with recommenda- liters of water during pregnancy (1, 11). While tions for the pregnant woman who wishes to some of the fluid gain is found in the maternal exercise. blood, tissue, and products of conception, a por- tion is believed to be distributed in the ground REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE substance of the connective tissue visible as pit- ting ankle edema in some pregnant women (1). Normal Anatomic and Physiologic Changes This extra fluid doses not shield the pregnant during Gestation which Affect the Ability to woman from dehydration associated with physical Exercise activity (1 1). The byproducts of increased metab- olism in pregnancy result in increased heat and Posture, Center of Gravity, and Body Weight waste production. Subcutaneous fat stored dur- The weight gain of 20-35 Ibs during an av- ing pregnancy acts as an insulator, reducing the conduction method of heat dissipation (1).T he erage, normal pregnancy causes shifts in the increased fluid needs of pregnancy combined with mother's posture and center of gravity. The pro- the increased fluid need of exercise make it es- truding abdomen would cause a forward shift of sential for the pregnant athlete to consume extra fluids. ' Reprint requests should by addressed to: 217 Questend Avenue. Pittsburgh, PA 15228. Energy Expenditure 0196-601 1/ 89/1009/0358$02.00/0 An estimated increase of 80,000k cal in die- THEJ OURNAOLF ORTHOPAEOAINCD SPORTSP HYSICATLH ERAPY tary intake over the 40 weeks of pregnancy is Copyright 0 1989 by The Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy Sections of the American Physical Therapy Association necessary to support growing fetal and maternal 358 FREYDER JOSPT March 1989 ®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ .noissimrep tuohtiw sesu rehto oN .ylno esu lanosrep roF .5202 ,02 enuJ no ta gro.tpsoj.www morf dedaolnwoD .devreser sthgir llA .®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ 9891 © thgirypoC tissues (1, 19). Due to increased weight and me- TABLE 1 tabolism, it is theorized that a pregnant woman Changes in basal metabolic rate (BMR) with advancing would use as much or more energy than a non- gestational age* pregnant one for daily activities (1 1) . Basal meta- -- Gestational Age BMR/kg Body Weight bolic rate per kilogram body weight was found to cal/kg/min increase progressively with increased gestational Postpartum (control) 12.2 & 2.5 age (Table 1). However, Lawrence et al. (19 ) found 20-28 weeks 14.9 & 1.6 no increase in energy cost of resting in pregnant 29-36 weeks 15.3 & 1.1 versus nonpregnant women and only slight in- Adapted from Blackburn & Calloway (4). creases in the energy cost of walking, with no change in the energy cost of walking when the increased body weight was accounted for. TABLE 2 The exact energy cost of pregnancy varies Cardiovascular responses during pregnancy from one individual to the next, depending on Cardiac hypertrophy (1,22) body size, physiological characteristics, and activ- lncreased cardiac output 3040% (1,9, 22) ity level. If dietary intake is inadequate to meet lncreased heart rate 4-20 bpm (1, 22) the needs of the mother and fetus, protein will be lncreased stroke volume 30% (1, 22) catabolized (1). Healthy weight gain is the best lncreased end diastolic volume 70-80 ml(1. 21, 22) assurance that calorie requirements are being met lncreased total blood volume 40-5O0/0 (1, 20, 21, 22) (11 . lncreased plasma volume 50% (1) lncreased red blood cell volume 20% (1) lncreased venous pressure to lower extremities (22) Respiratory Changes Decreased total peripheral resistance (22) Early in pregnancy, increased levels of pro- Decreased arteriovenous oxygen difference (1,3,22) Decreased arterial blood pressure (22) gesterone cause a reduced threshold for PC02 Decreased hematocrit 40% (1) and an increased sensitivity to any increase in pC02 (1, 23). This stimulates an increase in tidal volume and minute volume ventilation of up to mum at 20-24 weeks gestation (21). Varying 40% during normal pregnancy (1). Since there is results have been documented regarding the little increase in vital capacity, these volumes are changes in cardiac output at term (22). This area increased by a decrease in expiratory reserve requires further study. Arteriovenous oxygen dif- volume of 200 ml and a decrease in residual ference [(a-v)02d iffl decreases in early and mid- volume of 300 ml. pregnancy but again increases in the third trimes- In addition, anatomical changes occur. The ter to near prepregnancy levels (1, 3, 4, 23). diaphragm rises 4 inches, the lower ribs flare The supine position interferes with venous outward, and the subcostal angle widens. These return to the heart and reduces end diastolic changes account for the 15-20% increase in volume and cardiac output (1, 23). The uterus basal oxygen consumption during normal preg- also impedes flow through the iliac veins in the nancy (1, 23). sitting or standing position but less than in supine Additional respiratory stress during preg- (1). Blood pressure in supine or standing is lower nancy, such as exercise, is not a problem as the than in sidelying, especially near term (23). system has the capacity to increase 10-fold (1). However, these changes do cause the gravid Benefits of Maternal Exercise during woman to experience heightened awareness of Pregnancy the desire to breathe (23), and breathlessness on exertion (1, 23). Several researchers (1 4, 18 , 21 , 25), having studied the effects of exercise during pregnancy, Cardiovascular Changes cannot support any adverse effect on the mother or the fetus. Evidence has been found to support The cardiovascular changes during preg- possible positive effects of exercising while preg- nancy are summarized in Table 2. These param- nant. eters vary according to gestational age and posi- tion of the mother. Effects during Pregnancy Stroke volume increases in early pregnancy then decreases to near prepregnancy levels at lncreased physical work capacity has been term (4, 23), whereas heart rate increases pro- reported by several authors (14 ,18,25) in women gressively until about 32 weeks gestation, then who participate in aerobic exercise during preg- decreases slightly until term (4). Cardiac output nancy. Strength training (17 ) can decrease physi- gradually increases (1, 4, 1I ), reaching a maxi- cal discomfort and compensate for postural JOSPT March 1989 EXERCISING WHILE PREGNANT ®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ .noissimrep tuohtiw sesu rehto oN .ylno esu lanosrep roF .5202 ,02 enuJ no ta gro.tpsoj.www morf dedaolnwoD .devreser sthgir llA .®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ 9891 © thgirypoC changes (13). Subjectively, self-image was im- on level and 5% grade. However, with exer~ise proved (13 ). intensity of walking 3 mph on 10% grade, VOn Limited studies on the effect of exercise on increased only until 36 weeks gestation, then weight gain during pregnancy have been reported. decreased slightly in the last month of pregnancy. One female athlete who jogged regularly through- Collings et al. (10) noted an !8% improvement out pregnancy gained 18.7 Ibs and weighed 3.5 compared to a 40% decline in V02 when compar- Ibs less postpartum than prepregnancy (14). ing exercising verses nonexercising pregnant Kulpa et al. (18) reported a 6.4 Ib greater mean women (1 0). weight gain in exercising multiparous women Several authors have documented increased compared to controls. There was no difference in ventilation (VE) in exercising women with in- weight gain between exercising and control pri- creased gestational age (3,14). Artal et al. (3) also miparous women. No significant difference in fetal documented a greater increase in ventilation in weight was reported between groups. Body fat pregnant women than in controls. These authors of female athletes has been reported to be 50% also documented an increa?e in the ventilatory less than in the general population (26). Since the equivalent for oxygen (VE/VO2) with ipcreased underweight and overweight individuals are gestational age (3, 14). Although VE/VO~w as known to present special problems during preg- higher in pregnant subjects than in controls, the nancy (24), limiting weight gain during pregnancy difference was not statistically significant (3). may be a benefit or risk of exercise, or may have As mentioned earlier, tidal volume at rest is no effects. Conclusions about exercise and increased in pregnant women over controls (1,3). weight gain during pregnancy cannot be made The increase in tidal volume during exercise is until this subject is studied in more detail. Risks about the same for the same amount of work in of limited weight gain during pregnancy are dis- pregnant women versus controls (3). At higher cussed later in this paper. workloads, the increase in tidal volume is slightly less for pregnant women (3). In summary, oxygen consumption, ventila- Effects during Delivery and Postpartum tion, and tidal volume have been shown to adapt sufficiently to the combined stress ofoexercisea nd Researchers have reported reduced duration pregnancy for levels up to 70-75% V02max. Fur- of labor (1, 25), decreased rate of Cesarean sec- ther studies are needed to draw conclusions re- tion (13), decreased length of hospital stay (13 ), garding the respiratory responses at exercise lev- and subjectively easier labor (13) in women who els higher than 70-75% V02max. Until further exercised throughout pregnancy. In addition, studies are conducted, exercising at levels higher women who exercised recuperated more quickly than this is not recommended while pregnant. postpartum (11, 13). Although studies of de- creased infant birth weight have been reported in pregnant runners, Hall et al. (13 ) and Collings et Cardiovascular Effects al. (10) actually reported increased infant birth weight in women who exercised on a bicycle The cardiovascular changes occurring during ergometer. Further studies are needed to deter- exercise while pregnant are summarized in Table mine the relationship between weightbearing and 3. Although heart rate was shown to increase nonweightbearing exercise and fetal birth weight. progressively with submaximal and maximal ex- ercise in sheep (20), Blackburn and Calloway (4) and Artal and Wiswell (1) report a decrease in Effects of Exercise on the Mother's Body heart rate with maximal exercise in human sub- jects. Cardiac output may follow this same pattern Respiratory Effects (1). Heart rate recovery to pre-exercise levels was The effects of exercise on the respiratory longer with increased gestational age (14 ), but system are most influenced by gestational age stroke volume recovered more quickly in late ges- and intensity of exercise. In one highly fit runner tation (22). In sheep experiments, (a-v)02d iffer- observed throughout pregnancy, O2 consumption ence was increased with exercise (20) but no increased linearly from 60% in the third month to change has been reported in studies on human 70% in the eighth month (14). Kulpa et al. (18) subjects (1) . reported g training effect in women who exercised As with respiratory responses, cardiovascu- at 75% V02max during pregnancy when com- lar adaptations to exercise while pregnant may be pared to a control group of women who limited limited at maximal intensity levels. In addition, activity throughout pregnancy (18 ); Blackburn and adaptations may be decreased with advancing Calloway (4) reported increased V02 (expressed gestational age. It has been suggested that ve- in ml/kg/min), as pregnancy progressed for cy- nous pooling of blood in the lower extremities may cling at 300 or 400 kpm, and for walking 3 mph be responsible for decreased cardiovascular ad- 360 FREYDER JOSPT March 1989 ®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ .noissimrep tuohtiw sesu rehto oN .ylno esu lanosrep roF .5202 ,02 enuJ no ta gro.tpsoj.www morf dedaolnwoD .devreser sthgir llA .®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ 9891 © thgirypoC TABLE 3 Acute cardiovascular changes with maternal exercise during pregnancy HR Q Study Level of Exercise HR Recovery SV Submaximal Maximal Submaximal Maximal bPm ml mllminlkg Lotgering (20) (sheep 70-1 00% ~0,max t T t t experiments) Morton (22) 60-70% age pre- t >9 minutes t t dicted maximal HR t Hutchinson (14 ) 61- 70% ~0,max 2 minutes 2nd trimes- ter 13 minutes 3rd trimester Blackbum (4) Varied V02max t 1 not recorded Artal(1) Varied t 1 t t 1 aptations in late pregnancy, due to the enlarged TABLE 4 uterus compromising circulation (22). It is sug- Effects of weight gain during pregnancy* gested that women gradually decrease their work- Low Weight Gain High Weight Gain out time and intensity as pregnancy advances. t Vaginal bleed- f Hypertension Since uterine blood flow affects the fetus, ing changes in uterine blood flow during exercise will 1F etal birth f Duration of second stage of be discussed with fetal responses. weight labor f Cesarean sections Body Weight and Body Fat f Fetal birth weight t Incidence of pre-eclampsia Studies reporting direct correlations between t Perinatal mortality exercise and body weightlbody fat gained during Adapted from Brown et al. (6) and Shepard et al. (24). pregnancy are limited. However, weight gain is directly related to the birth weight of the fetus. Among factors known to influence birth weight, rate was similar for mild, moderate, and strenuous prenatal weight gain accounts for the largest pro- exercise (2). portion of variation in term infants and second It is interesting to note that in both studies largest proportion among infants of all gestational reporting fetal bradycardia, the fetal heart rate fell ages (6). within the initial 30 sec of exercise, remained at Some effects of low or high weight gain dur- this level throughout exercise, and returned to ing pregnancy are listed in Table 4. In one study, pre-exercise levels within 1-3 minutes post-ex- Asian mothers producing light babies put on sig- ercise, followed by a period of fetal tachycardia nificantly less fat during the second trimester as (2, 17). measured by triceps skinfold (28). Anthropometric In all studies but one (10) reporting fetal measurements to monitor body fat as well as body tachycardia, the fetal heart rate was measured weight measurements may prove beneficial for after exercise (7, 9, 27). The fetal heart rate was the exercising mother-to-be. If body weight gain recorded during and after exercise in the two is less than 15O/0 (24) or skinfold measurements studies reporting fetal bradycardia (2, 17). Due to the rapid increase in fetal heart rate post-exercise, are decreasing with increasing gestational age (28), decreasing exercise intensity and/or increas- the lack of fetal heart rate recordings during ex- ing calorie intake may be necessary. Further stud- ercise may explain some of the different results. Factors which may be related to accelerated ies in this area are needed. fetal heart rate following maternal exercise include fetal arousal, placental transfer of elevated mater- Effects of Exercise on the Uterus and Fetus nal catecholamines, increased maternal and fetal temperature or reduction of uterine blood flow (9, Fetal Heart Rate 10). In addition, it has been suggested that fetal The effect of exercise on fetal heart rate is tachycardia post-exercise may be a compensa- summarized in Table 5. Although some instances tion to fetal bradycardia during exercise (10 , 17). of fetal bradycardia have been reported, most Fetal bradycardia may be caused by a sus- studies report fetal tachycardia. Mode of exercise tained vagal reflex secondary to major blood vol- did not affect the results. Increase in fetal heart ume shifts in both mother and fetus (2), cord JOSPT March 1989 EXERCISING WHILE PREGNANT 36 1 ®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ .noissimrep tuohtiw sesu rehto oN .ylno esu lanosrep roF .5202 ,02 enuJ no ta gro.tpsoj.www morf dedaolnwoD .devreser sthgir llA .®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ 9891 © thgirypoC TABLE 5 Fetal heart rate response to exercise study No. NO. No. Typeof Participants Bradycardia Tachycardia Exerase' Artal et at. (2) 45 Veille et al. (27) 17 ClapP (7) 6 Collings and Curet (9) 25 Jovanovic et al. (1 7) 6 Collinns et al. (10) 20 W, Walking; R, running; B, bicycling. compression (2), or anticipation of the change in Studies by Clapp et al. (8) and Jones et al. placental perfusion pressure (17 ). Fetal bradycar- (1 6) recorded increased maternal rectal tempera- dia maintains systolic perfusion pressure of fetal tures of 0.4-1 .OO C. Surprisingly, the lower results tissue in the face of decreased placental blood occurred with later gestational age (8). This could flow, and tissue perfusion is thought to be main- be accounted for partially, but not completely, by tained through increased O2 extraction. the decrease in exercise intensity (8, 16). It is suggested that the efficiency of heat dissipation Uterine Blood Flow, Hyperthermia, and Fetal may be increased during pregnancy as it is with both training and heat acclimatization (8), although Hypoxia sweat production did not change throughout Two conditions which may occur during ma- pregnancy (16). There was no change in vaginal ternal exercise-decreased uterine blood flow temperature either at rest or after exercise, in any and hyperthermia-are of great concern because trimester during pregnancy, suggesting that heat of the possibility of fetal hypoxia. Lotgering (20) was not stored in significant amounts in the region reported progressive decreases in uterine blood of the fetus during maternal exercise (16 ). flow in sheep experiments. Uterine blood flow The mother's thermoregulatory mechanisms decreased with longer and more intense exercise. appear capable of dissipating the heat produced Uterine blood flow gradually increased after ex- during moderate exercise (12), but the experi- ercise, returning to normal values within 20 min- ments on sheep (20) suggest the need for fur- utes. ther study of thermoregulatory responses during In humans, uterine blood flow can be com- strenuous exercise. The ethical issue of subject- promised as blood flow is redistributed to working ing pregnant women to strenuous exercise which muscles away from the visceral organs (2,26), as raises core temperature above 39' C limits our occurs during exercise in the general population. knowledge of the thermoregulatory response. Another mechanism which may decrease uter- ine blood flow is the increased levels of cat- Guidelines for Exercise during Pregnancy echolamines during exercise (2, 13). Intravenous administration of norepinephrine in term patients In 1985, the American College of Obste- stimulates uterine activity, but no increased activ- tricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) published ity was noted after exercise in a study on pregnant Guidelines for Exercise During Pregnancy and exercisers done by Veille (27), and fetal activity Postpartum (Table 6). The guidelines were de- and breathing were unchanged as a result of signed with the average woman in mind, exercis- maternal exercise in another study (1 6). The effect ing alone. Maternal and fetal safety are of primary of exercise on uterine blood flow remains uncer- concern. Some have criticized the guidelines be- tain, but the birth of healthy, normal, term infants cause they do not sufficiently tax the woman who (1 6) suggests the ability of the fetus to withstand is accustomed to regular strenuous exercise pre- this stress. Since physical conditioning can de- pregnancy (1 2). Data suggests no adverse effects crease the catecholamines response to exercise, of exercise in women who are conditioned to such it may be beneficial to condition the expectant activity before pregnancy (15 ). mother before the stress of labor and delivery In the same year, Edward C. Maeder also (13 ). published guidelines for pregnant patients. These In Lotgering's sheep studies (20), maternal are listed in Table 7. While some of the guidelines temperature increased as much as 1.5O C with are similar to those of the ACOG Guidelines, strenuous exercise and required more than an Maeder's guidelines allow flexibility for the aero- hour to return to pre-exercise levels. Fetal tem- bically conditioned woman. In addition, Maeder perature rose 1.3' C, and remained significantly gives recommendations for the health profes- elevated even after 1 hour of recovery. sional managing the pregnant patient who wishes 362 FREYDER JOSPT March 1989 ®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ .noissimrep tuohtiw sesu rehto oN .ylno esu lanosrep roF .5202 ,02 enuJ no ta gro.tpsoj.www morf dedaolnwoD .devreser sthgir llA .®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ 9891 © thgirypoC TABLE 6 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Guidelines For Exercise During Pregnancy and Postpartum' Regular exercise (at least three times per week) is 8. Care should be taken to gradually rise from preferable to intermittent activity. Competitive activi- the floor to avoid orthostatic hypotension. ties should be discouraged. Some form of activity involving the legs should be continued for a brief period. Vigorous exercise should not be performed in hot, humid weather or during a period of febrile illness. 9. Liquids should be taken liberally before and after exercise to prevent dehydration. If Ballistic movements (jerky, bouncy motions) should necessary, activity should be interrupted to be avoided. Exercise should be done on a wooden replenish fluids. floor or a tightly carpeted surface to reduce shock and provide a sure footing. 10. Women who have led sedentary life-styles Deep flexion or extension of joints should be should begin with physical activity of very low intensity and advance activity levels avoided because of connective tissue laxity. Activi- very gradually. ties that require jumping, jarring motions, or rapid changes in direction should be avoided because of 11. Activity should be stopped and the physi- joint instability. cian consulted if any unusual symptoms appear. Vigorous exercise should be preceded by a five-min- ute period of muscle warm-up. This can be accom- PREGNANCY ONLY plished by slow walking or stationary cycling with low resistance. 1. Maternal heart rate should not exceed 140 beatslminutes. Vigorous exercise should be followed by a period of 2. Strenuous activities should not exceed 15 gradually declining activity that includes gentle sta- minutes in duration. tionary stretching. Because connective tissue laxity increases the risk of joint injury, stretches should not 3. No exercise should be performed in the su- be taken to the point of maximum resistance. pine position after the fourth month of ges- tation is completed. Heart rate should be measured at times of peak activity. Target heart rates and limits established in 4. Exercises that employ the Valsalva maneu- consultation with the physician should not be ex- ver should be avoided. ceeded. 5. Calorie intake should be adequate to meet not only the extra energy needs of preg- nancy, but also of the exercise performed. 6. Maternal core temperature should not ex- ceed 38%. ' Reprinted with permission from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Exercise During Pregnancy and the Postnatal period (ACOG Home Exercise Programs). Washington DC, ACOG. 1985, p 4. TABLE 7 Exercise Guidelines for Pregnant Patients* 1. Do not suddenly increase the amount of exercise undertaken. 2. Do not exceed the amount of exercise normally undertaken before pregnancy. 3. Eliminate sports in which the risk of injury is high, i.e., water skiing. 4. Late in pregnancy, avoid excessive aerobic exercise, i.e., long-distance running. 5. Avoid exercises that require lying on the back. 6. Avoid activities where balance is of major importance. 7. In the latter part of pregnancy, avoid activities likely to cause joint strains. 8. Avoid changing positions quickly (to prevent dizziness). 9. Wear good supportive footwear and adequate breast support while exercising. 10. Do not exercise to the point of exhaustion or severe breathlessness. 11. Remember the importance of good nutrition when undertaking an exercise program. 12. Monitor pulse rate and keep within the recommended target zone. ' Reprinted with permission from Maeder (21). - to continue exercising. These guidelines are: Caution the patient to avoid hyperther- - Identify the high-risk obstetric patient. At mia, especially in the first trimester. - present, strenuous exercise cannot be Monitor uterine activity to detect uterine advised for women at high risk. hypoxia (21). - Evaluate the patients previous exercise Intensity of exercise may be an important or fitness status. factor in exercise prescription (10 ). Although ex- JOSPT March 1989 EXERCISING WHILE PREGNANT ®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ .noissimrep tuohtiw sesu rehto oN .ylno esu lanosrep roF .5202 ,02 enuJ no ta gro.tpsoj.www morf dedaolnwoD .devreser sthgir llA .®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ 9891 © thgirypoC ercise up to 70°h +onmax has been shown to and fetal temperature as well as the possibility of produce normal healthy infants (9),t his level of hypoxia to the fetus have been reviewed. exercise cannot be recommended until Tore re- Although studies on exercise during preg- search is performed. Due to the higher V02max nancy have been limited, the results have been observed during weightbearing activities, the favorable. Little, if any, negative effects on the speed of activities such as jogging should be mother and fetus have been documented. Some progressively decreased as pregnancy pro- studies have suggested improved fetal outcomes gresses (1 4). Women who participate in "aero- when the mother exercises throughout preg- bics" classes should decrease the intensity of nancy. Large scale experiments are necessary activity as pregnancy progresses. before conclusions can be drawn. Moderate ex- Certain activities must be avoided during ercise appears to be safe during pregnancy, as pregnancy, even if the mother is accustomed to long as common sense is used and guidelines are such activities. Sports recommended and dis- followed. couraged during pregnancy are listed in Table 8. Those sports discouraged are all potentially harm- REFERENCES ful to mother and/or fetus. Artal R. Wiswell RA: Exercise in Pregnancy. Baltimore: Williams 8 Because of the progressive nature of the W~lk~n1s9, 86 physical changes of pregnancy, the obstetrician Artal R, Rutherford S. Romen Y. Kammula K. Dorey F. Wiswell R: needs to re-evaluate the exercise prescription at Fetal heart rate responses to maternal exercise. Am J Obstet Gynecol 155:729-734.1986 regular intervals throughout the pregnancy (13 ). Artal R, Wiswell R. Romen Y. Dorey F: Pulmonary responses to Many medical conditions are contraindications to exercise in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 154:378-383. 1986 Blackburn MW. Calloway DH: Heart rate and energy expend~ture exercise during pregnancy (1, 5). Any disturbance of pregnant and lactating women. Am J Clin Nutrition 42:1161- of fetal growth (5) or signs of fetal distress (1) are 1169.1985 contraindications to exercise. Bonds DR. Delivoria-Papadopoulos M: Exercise during preg- nancy-potential fetal and placental metabolic effects. Ann Clin There is a need for structured exercise pro- Lab Sci 15:91-98,1985 grams where the pregnant women can be super- Brown JE, Berdan KW. Splett P. Robinson M. Harris W: Prenatal vised by qualified medical personnel. The com- weight gains related to the birth of healthy-sized infants to low- income women. J Am Diet Assn 86:1679-1683. 1986 bined efforts of obstetricians, physical therapists, Clapp JF: Fetal heart rate response to runnmg in mid-pregnancy and exercise physiologists is recommended to and late pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 153:251-252.1985 Clapp JF. Wesley M. Sleamaker RH: Therrnoregulatory and meta- develop individualized exercise prescriptions, bohc responses to jogging prlor to and during pregnancy. Med Sci monitor maternal and fetal responses, and con- Sports Med 19:124-130.1987 tinue researching the responses to exercise dur- Collings C. Curet LB: Fetal Heart rate response to maternal exer- cise. Am J Obstet Gynecol 151: 498-501, 1985 ing pregnancy. Collings CA. Curet LB. Mullin JP: Maternal and fetal responses to a maternal aerobic exercise program. Am J Obstet Gynecol 145:702-707,1983 SUMMARY Diddle AW: Interrelationship of pregnancy and athletic perform- ance. J Tenn Med Assn 77:265-269.1984 The stress of pregnancy necessitates Gauthier MM: Guidelines for exercise during pregnancy: too little or too much? Phys Sports Med 14:163-169, 1986 changes in every system of the mother's body. Hall DC, Kaufmann DA: Effects of aerobic and strength conditioning The stress of exercise affects some of the same on pregnancy outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 157:1199-1203, systems, particularly the respiratory and cardio- 1987 Hutchinson PL. Cureton KL. Sparling PB: Metabolic and circulatory vascular systems. The combined stress of exer- responses to running during pregnancy. Phys Sports Med 9:55- cise and pregnancy on the mother has been dis- 61. 1981 cussed. Jarrett JC. Spellacy WN: Jogging during pregnancy: an improved outcome? Obstet Gynecol61:705-709,1983 It has been demonstrated that the fetus may Jones RL. Bott~J J. Anderson WM. Bennett NL: Thermoregulation be affected by the exercising mother. Changes in during aerobc exerclse In pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol65:340-345. 1985 fetal heart rate, uterine blood flow, and maternal Jovanovic L. Kessler A. Peterson CM: Human maternal and fetal responses to graded exercise. J Appl Physiol58:1719-1722. 1985 TABLE 8 Kulpa PJ. Wh~teE M. Visscher R: Aerobic exercise in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 156:1395-1400.1987 Sports during pregnancy' Lawrence M. Singh J. Laerence F. Whitehead RG: The energy cost of common daily activities in African women: increased ex- Recommended Discouraaed penditure in pregnancy? Am J Clin Nutr 42:753-763. 1985 Swimming Diving (scuba & diving board) 20. Lotgermg FK: Exercise In Pregnancy: an experimental study of t Running/jogging Water skiing maternal and fetal responses to exercise in sheep. Theses. Unt- verslty of Rutterdam. May 11. 1983 Walking Mountain climbing 21. Maeder EC: Effects of sports and exercise in pregnancy. Post t Tennis Raquetball Grad Med 77:112-113.1985 Biking All contact sports 22. Morton MJ. Paul MS. Campas GR, Hart MV. Metcalfe J: Exercise dynam~csin late gestation: Effects of physical trainmg. Am J Obstet Ballroom dancing Horseback riding Gynecol 152:91-97.1985 23. Quilligan EJ. Kretchmer N: Fetal and Maternal Medicine. New York: Adapted from Diddle (11 ). t These activities should only be performed if accustomed to 24. J S o h h e n p a W rd il e M y J a , n H d e S ll o o n n s b . r a 1 n 9 d 8 0 K G. Bracken ME: Proportional weight activity before pregnancy. gain and compl~cationso f pregnancy, labor, and dellvery in healthy 364 FREYDER JOSPT March 1989 ®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ .noissimrep tuohtiw sesu rehto oN .ylno esu lanosrep roF .5202 ,02 enuJ no ta gro.tpsoj.www morf dedaolnwoD .devreser sthgir llA .®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ 9891 © thgirypoC women of normal pre-pregnant stature. Am J Obstet Gynecol 27. Veille JC. Hohimer AR. Burry K, Speroff L: The effect of exercise 155:947-854.1986 on uterine activity in the last eight weeks of pregnancy. Am J 25. Shy KK. Brown ZA: Maternal and fetal well-being. West J Med Obstet Gynecol 151: 727-730,1985 141: 807-815,1984 28. Viegas OAL. Cole TJ. Wharton BA: Impaired fat deposition in 26. Speroff L: Can exercise cause problems in pregnancy and men- pregnancy: an indicator for nutritional intervention. Am J Clin Nutr struation? Contemp Gynecol 16:57-71. 1980 45:23-28.1987 JOSPT March 1989 EXERCISING WHILE PREGNANT ®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ .noissimrep tuohtiw sesu rehto oN .ylno esu lanosrep roF .5202 ,02 enuJ no ta gro.tpsoj.www morf dedaolnwoD .devreser sthgir llA .®yparehT lacisyhP stropS & cideapohtrO fo lanruoJ 9891 © thgirypoC