THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE RESEARCH FROM THE ACE SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY PANEL W. LARRY KENNEY, PH.D., FACSM Maintaining optimal hydration is essential during exercise, as both dehydration and overhydration can be detrimental to performance and, if extreme, can have severe health consequences. Dehydration occurs during high-intensity or long- duration exercise, especially in hot and humid conditions. Symptoms include thirst, flushed skin, apathy and discomfort. Exercise performance begins to decline once water loss exceeds 2% of an individual’s body mass. In addition to physical impairments, dehydration also impairs cognitive function, including reaction time, task performance and mood state. Overhydration occurs when plasma sodium concentration levels drop too low, either because water clearance by the kidneys is insufficient or water intake exceeds sweat losses. Signs include dizziness, nausea and puffiness, which worsen to confusion, vomiting and swelling of the hands and feet when plasma sodium concentration levels continue to drop. Overhydation is typically treated with hypertonic fluids or IV infusion. Assessing hydration status involves monitoring changes in body weight, urine color and thirst, and can be used to help make individualized decisions for replacing fluids. People who exercise longer than 60 minutes, especially in hot and humid environments, may benefit from drinking fluids with added carbohydrates or electrolytes. THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 1 BODY FLUID DYSREGULATION impairs mechanisms of thermoregulation and increases cardiovascular strain during exercise, which negatively impact exercise performance and may compromise positive training-induced hemodynamic adaptations. Maintaining optimal hydration is a challenge During exercise in hot conditions, sweat rates during exercise—especially exercise in the heat—due to typically fall in the range of 1 to 2 L/h, but can the robust sweating response and associated water and be as high as 2 to 3 L/h in trained athletes. sodium losses. Evaporation of sweat is the major avenue of heat dissipation during exercise and is necessary to limit the rise in core temperature. During exercise in hot conditions, sweat rates typically fall in the range of 1 to 2 L/h, but can be as high as 2 to 3 L/h in trained athletes.1 This rate of fluid loss may result in severe dehydration and compromised performance if water loss is not replaced by adequate fluid intake. Although it occurs less commonly, overhydration during exercise may also lead to severe health consequences. KEY POINTS Thus, it is important to prevent large fluid deficits while also avoiding excess fluid intake during exercise. However, • Deviations from optimal total body water, including dehydration and overhydration, may lead to performance the large inter-individual variability in sweat loss and decrements during exercise and, if extreme, can have habitual fluid consumption makes it impossible to establish potentially severe health consequences. a universal fluid-replacement strategy for all athletes. • Given competing demands for a limited blood This review will discuss the physiological and performance volume, dehydration can induce cardiovascular and consequences of both dehydration and overhydration, thermoregulatory strain during exercise, increasing the assessment techniques and current controversies risk of heat illness. surrounding the topic of fluid replacement. • Excess fluid intake can lead to a life-threatening Before discussing the physical and performance condition known as exercise-associated hyponatremia consequences of changes from euhydration, or optimal total (EAH), which occurs when plasma sodium body water, it is helpful to define the relevant terminology. concentrations become too low. Hypohydration and hyperhydration are defined as a body • To minimize performance decrements, athletes should aim water deficit or excess, respectively. While hypohydration to maintain hydration (<2 percent body mass loss), while and dehydration are often used interchangeably and avoiding weight gain. have similar physical and performance consequences, • For competitive athletes focused on performance, dehydration is defined as the acute process of losing body hydration-assessment methods (including monitoring water. For purposes of this review, the term underhydration changes in body weight) can be used to implement optimal will be used when either hypo- or dehydration has the same hydration strategies. consequences. Finally, because there is no single value that • The addition of electrolytes and carbohydrates to fluids may represents euhydration, alterations in body water are most provide additional benefits, especially for individuals with often expressed as a percent change in body mass. high salt content in their sweat or athletes competing in long-duration events. THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 2 RESEARCH REVIEW Underhydration The blood-flow demands of exercising Evaporation of sweat is one of the primary mechanisms of heat loss during exercise. Dehydration typically occurs skeletal muscle during exercise are during high-intensity2 or long-duration exercise,1 and further increased by the need to pump results from large sweat losses in the absence of adequate large volumes of blood to the skin for fluid consumption. Symptoms of underhydration include convective and evaporative heat loss. thirst, flushed skin, apathy and discomfort. With severe underhydration, individuals experience dizziness, headaches, nausea, chills and vomiting.3 Due to the significant water loss in sweat, evaporative cooling leads to hypovolemia, or reduced blood volume, which is a major cause of excess physiological strain during an exercise bout. In addition heat loss, which can contribute to serious heat illness. to water loss, there is an obligatory loss of ions, primarily Further, one of the major hemodynamic adaptations of sodium and chloride, in sweat. During exercise, sweat exercise training is the expansion of plasma volume for sodium concentrations can range from 20 to 80 mmol/L, circulation to the skin during exercise.10 Training in an which amounts to roughly 1 to 5 grams of salt per liter of underhydrated state limits plasma volume expansion, thus sweat.4,5 Thus, the loss of water and electrolytes from sweat offsetting potential training-induced improvements in skin is significant, but is also highly variable due to differences blood flow during exercise.11 in genetics, training status, acclimatization status, clothing In addition to thermoregulatory effects, underhydration and the environment. Sweating increases in hot and humid increases the strain on the cardiovascular system. The environments, but the portion of the sweat that evaporates reduction in circulating blood volume decreases the return of is reduced when the relative humidity is high or when an blood back to the heart, thus reducing stroke volume, or the individual is wearing sweat-restrictive fabrics.6 Trained and/or heat acclimatized individuals have more dilute amount of blood pumped from the heart per contraction.12 Heart rate must then increase further in order to maintain sweat and higher sweating rates compared to untrained or unacclimatized individuals.7,8 Sports medicine professionals, cardiac output.12 However, during severe underhydration, the demands on the heart may become large enough that as well as the individual exerciser him- or herself, cardiac output actually begins to decline. As a result, blood should consider these factors when considering fluid- flow to not only the skin, but also to active skeletal muscle, replacement strategies. can be compromised.13 In other words, exercise combined The blood-flow demands of exercising skeletal muscle with heat stress results in a competition between the central during exercise are further increased by the need to pump and peripheral (skin and muscle) circulation for a limited large volumes of blood to the skin for convective and blood volume, which is heightened by the hypovolemia evaporative heat loss. The loss of blood volume resulting associated with underhydration. The magnitude of thermal from dehydration places significant thermal strain on and cardiovascular strain becomes progressively greater the body. Dehydration reduces the body’s ability to direct with increasing levels of underhydration.14,15 fluids to sweat glands, which compromises the sweating Although not universally accepted as fact, the physiological response and leads to greater increases in core temperature. consequences of underhydration may significantly impact As a result, the whole-body sweating rate at a given core athletic performance, particularly with high-intensity temperature is lower in an underhydrated state.9 Additionally, hypovolemia impairs blood flow to the skin, the major exercise and/or long-duration exercise.2,16–19 Proposed mechanisms of impaired performance include increased avenue of convective heat loss from the body. The onset of thermal and cardiovascular strain, changes in central both vasodilation in the skin and the sweating response nervous system function and metabolic alterations such are delayed to a higher core temperature threshold during exercise in an underhydrated state.9 As such, underhydration as increased glycogen utilization.9 Identification of the level of underhydration at which performance impairments significantly attenuates both evaporative and convective THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 3 below 135 mmol/L.30 Although the incidence is rare, EAH can occur when (1) water clearance by the kidneys is insufficient or (2) water ingestion exceeds sweat losses.31–34 Less likely in acclimatized individuals, the loss of salt- concentrated sweat, as occurs in “salty sweaters,” may also lead to extracellular sodium dilution and increase the risk become apparent can be challenging due to difficulties of EAH.32 EAH is observed most commonly in slower-paced in determining baseline hydration, the potential lack of participants who consume fluids frequently throughout the precision necessary to detect changes in performance and course of long-duration events (>4 hours).35,36 With excess the use of different tasks and methodologies to induce fluid intake, the solute concentration of the extracellular hypohydration (e.g., fluid restriction, exercise or diuretics). space decreases, causing water to move into the cells and, However, the general consensus among researchers is that, ultimately, intracellular swelling. This intracellular swelling in moderate to hot environments, performance decrements can lead to severe edema, particularly in the cerebral and begin to occur once underhydration exceeds 2 percent body pulmonary circulations. Whether the cause of EAH relates mass.20–22 At this level of underhydration, individuals display solely to the volume of fluid ingested, or whether the type of shorter exercise times to exhaustion and higher perceived fluid can play a role, has been debated by researchers. The exertion ratings.2,19,23,24 Inconsistencies in the published bulk of the evidence indicates that the volume, but not the impact of underhydration on exercise are likely due to fluid composition, is associated with hyponatremia and is variations in definitions, assessment of hydration status, likely the primary factor leading to EAH.35 environmental conditions and large individual variation in initial total body water and tolerance to dehydration. Given With excess fluid intake, the solute the severe levels of dehydration observed in some elite concentration of the extracellular athletes during competition, the possibility remains that these individuals are able to better tolerate underhydration space decreases, causing water to with minimal declines in performance. move into the cells and, ultimately, In addition to compromised endurance performance, intracellular swelling. several studies have shown impairments in anaerobic performance.25,26 The mechanisms underlying anaerobic Symptoms of EAH begin to appear when plasma sodium performance decrements are not well understood but are concentration drops below 130 mmol/L and include likely due to reductions in muscle strength and power.26 dizziness, nausea and puffiness.35,36 When plasma sodium Underhydration also impairs cognitive function, including concentrations fall below 125 mmol/L, symptoms become reaction time, task performance and mood state.27,28 increasingly severe and include swelling in the hands and Reductions in cerebral blood flow and oxygenation29 and/or feet, confusion, vomiting, delirium and disorientation. If diminished psychological drive are evident in underhydration plasma sodium drops below 120 mmol/L, the chances and could therefore mediate these performance decrements. of cerebral edema, brainstem herniation and death increase significantly. Many symptoms of EAH (vomiting, Overhydration headache and fatigue) are non-specific and mimic those of Just as deficits in body water can be detrimental to health underhydration. Therefore, plasma sodium or body-weight and performance, overhydration can also have severe measurements may be required to determine if an individual consequences. As outlined in the Statement of the 3rd is suffering from EAH or dehydration.30 EAH is typically International Exercise-Associated Hyponatremia Consensus treated by ingestion of hypertonic fluids, or, in severe cases, Development Conference, excess fluid intake may lead to sodium replacement through IV infusion to redistribute a condition known as exercise-associated hyponatremia fluid from the intracellular to the extracellular space and (EAH), which is defined as a plasma sodium concentration reduce swelling. THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 4 most often cited fluid-replacement strategies are (1) to determine expected sweat losses given the exercise task and environmental conditions in order to plan a drinking schedule and (2) to drink according to thirst, or ad libitum. The sensation of thirst is typically delayed in performance athletes; therefore, it is often not recommended to use thirst as a rehydration strategy for elite athletes. Recreationally active individuals can typically rely on thirst, which is stimulated at approximately 2 percent hypohydration, as this level of underhydration will have minimal effect on recreational exercise performance and limit the risk of HYDRATION STATUS ASSESSMENT EAH. After exercise, it is recommended to consume 100 to AND FLUID REPLACEMENT 150 percent of measured fluid losses due to bolus-induced diuresis, the increased urine production resulting from Assessing hydration status is important for developing consumption of large volumes.38 Given the underhydration- individualized hydration strategies. However, many reliable induced impairments in exercise performance, the idea scientific methods are time-consuming or expensive. that pre-exercise hyperhydration could reduce the adverse Additionally, some assessment techniques largely reflect consequences of dehydration has also emerged. However, changes in hydration status rather than providing an evidence largely indicates that pre-exercise hyperhydration absolute value for diagnosis. Despite these limitations, provides limited significant thermoregulatory or endurance- there are several methods that can be used, sometimes in performance benefits during exercise relative combination, that provide athletes and health professionals to euhydration.39 with valuable information for decision-making strategies. Individual measures, such as changes in body weight, It is impossible to recommend a universal replacement urine color and thirst, are non-invasive and inexpensive strategy for all physically active individuals given the high cues of altered hydration status. Measuring changes in individual genetic variability in sweat rate, sweat sodium body weight from a reliable baseline can provide a valid losses, heat acclimatization status, training status and daily indication of fluid-replacement needs during exercise. fluid consumption. However, routine measurements of body Body-weight changes should be measured on three weight pre- and post-exercise can be useful for estimating consecutive days to account for daily weight fluctuations. fluid replacement needs.40 It is important to keep in mind Using refractometry to measure urine-specific gravity, or that those exercising for long durations, in extremely hot the concentration of urine relative to that of distilled water, weather or in sweat-restrictive fabrics may have considerably is also relatively inexpensive, simple and reliable. However, different fluid-replacement needs. Many football players with it is important to note that urine-assessment techniques high body weights wearing full uniforms during two-a-day estimate hydration status roughly three to four hours prior practices, for example, can sweat as much as 8 L/day.41 to measurement. Other techniques include urine or plasma Recreationally active individuals typically do not require solute concentration, but these are generally expensive and additives to water. However, added carbohydrates and/or time consuming. electrolytes in fluids or diets can provide additional benefits It is recommended that athletes aim to keep body-mass during (1) exercise sessions lasting longer than one hour losses lower than 2 percent while avoiding weight gain.22 or (2) sessions that include high-intensity, stop-and-go Maintaining less than a 2 percent body-mass deficit intervals, especially in hot and humid environments.42–45 during exercise maintains cardiac output and skin blood Individuals with higher sweat rates or sweat sodium flow, and limits the rise in core temperature.37 Optimal concentrations in particular may require additional hydration strategies during exercise are frequently debated electrolytes during exercise. Added sodium in replacement by scientific researchers and health professionals. The two beverages stimulates thirst, enhances fluid retention THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 5 and improves palatability, all of which result in higher At the other end of the age spectrum, children may require fluid intakes.46,47 The addition of low concentrations (e.g., special attention for increased thermal risk due to their <6 percent) of carbohydrates aids in maintaining blood susceptibility to voluntary dehydration, as they often glucose concentration and carbohydrate oxidation, without do not drink adequate volumes of fluid when given free compromising gastric emptying.48,49 While the optimal access to fluids during exercise.51 Young children may have beverage composition cannot be established for all athletes underdeveloped sweating mechanisms and thus lower sweat in all exercise occasions, it is recommended that individuals losses compared to adults.50 As a result, body temperature strive to replace all fluid and electrolytes lost during exercise. increases to a greater extent in children at a given level of dehydration compared to healthy adults. Providing palatable Special Populations drinks containing sodium and carbohydrates is a useful strategy for increasing voluntary fluid intake in children.52,53 Special attention is warranted for several populations at increased risk for underhydration. The elderly, in particular, Close monitoring should also be given to individuals with may require alternative fluid-intake recommendations. As sickle cell trait. These individuals are heterozygous for a people age, the sensation of thirst decreases in response disorder of the blood in which red blood cells take on a to hypovolemia.50 The elderly are able to eventually restore “sickle” shape. Underhydration in this clinical population body-water homeostasis after fluid loss, but often at a slower increases the risk of rhabdomyolysis, or the breakdown of pace. Several medications (e.g., diuretics, sedatives and muscle cells and the subsequent release of damaged cell laxatives) may also make this population more susceptible components. Cystic fibrosis (CF) represents yet another to underhydration. In addition to the physiological- and clinical population that often has a greater difficulty pharmacological-based risk for dehydration, the onset of maintaining hydration and therefore typically has a dementia affects the ability of the elderly to adequately reduced tolerance to heat stress. During exercise in the consume fluids when needed. heat, CF patients have elevated sweat sodium and chloride concentrations, resulting in a serum solute concentration that is much lower than healthy individuals.54 Given that an increase in body fluid solute concentration is a trigger for thirst, CF patients often have a reduced stimulus to intake fluids.55 Deviations from normal total body water can have significant physiological consequences that have the potential to contribute to performance decrements, SUMMARY as well as health consequences. During exercise, individuals should strive to maintain normal hydration (<2 percent body mass loss), while avoiding weight gain. The addition of electrolytes and carbohydrates to ingested fluids may provide additional benefits, particularly for “salty sweaters” or those competing in long-duration events. For competitive athletes focused on performance, reliable and inexpensive hydration-assessment methods, such as monitoring changes in body weight, can be used to implement optimal hydration strategies. THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 6 ABOUT W. Larry Kenney, Ph.D., FACSM, is a professor of physiology and kinesiology at the Noll Physiological Research Center at The THE Pennsylvania State University. He received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in biology from AUTHOR the Indiana University of Pennsylvania, and his doctorate in physiology from Penn State. Kenney has done extensive research in the area of aging and temperature regulation, including responses of older men and women to heat and cold stress and dehydration. He has published well over 100 scientific articles and book chapters and has lectured around the world on these topics. Kenney has been active in the American Physiological Society and the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM), serving as president and as a member of the board of trustees for the latter. He has also served as chair of the Gatorade Sports Science Institute and senior editor of the 5th edition of ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription. THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 7 REFERENCES 1. Rehrer N.J. & Burke, L.M. (1996). Sweat losses during various sports. 16. Bardis, C.N. et al. (2013). Mild dehydration and cycling performance Australian Journal of Nutrition and Dietetics, 53, 4, S13–S6. during 5-kilometer hill climbing. Journal of Athletic Training, 48, 6, 741–747. 2. Walsh, R.M. et al. (1994). Impaired high-intensity cycling performance time at low levels of dehydration. International Journal 17. Casa, D.J. et al. (2010). Influence of hydration on physiological of Sports Medicine, 15, 7, 392–398. function and performance during trail running in the heat. Journal of Athletic Training, 45, 2, 147–156. 3. Shirreffs, S.M. et al. (2004). The effects of fluid restriction on hydration status and subjective feelings in man. The British Journal 18. Cheuvront, S.N. et al. (2005). Hypohydration impairs endurance of Nutrition, 91, 6, 951–958. exercise performance in temperate but not cold air. Journal of Applied Physiology, 99, 5, 1972–1976. 4. Maughan, R.J. et al. (2004). Fluid and electrolyte intake and loss in elite soccer players during training. International Journal of Sport 19. Ebert, T.R. et al. (2007). Influence of hydration status on Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 14, 3, 333–346. thermoregulation and cycling hill climbing. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 39, 2, 323–329. 5. Shirreffs, S.M. & Maughan, R.J. (1985). Whole body sweat collection in humans: An improved method with preliminary data on electrolyte 20. Sawka, M.N. (1992). Physiological consequences of hypohydration: content. Journal of Applied Physiolpgy, 82, 1, 336–341. Exercise performance and thermoregulation. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 24, 6, 657–670. 6. Moyen, N.E. et al. (2014). Increasing relative humidity impacts low- intensity exercise in the heat. Aviation, Space, and Environmental 21. Convertino, V.A. et al. (1996). American College of Sports Medicine Medicine, 85, 2, 112–119. position stand: Exercise and fluid replacement. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 28, 1, i–vii. 7. Lee, J.B. et al. (2014). Long distance runners present upregulated sweating responses than sedentary counterparts. PLoS One, 9, 4. 22. Cheuvront, S.N., Carter, R. 3rd & Sawka, M.N. (2003). Fluid balance and endurance exercise performance. Current Sports Medicine 8. Buono, M.J., Ball, K.D. & Kolkhorst, F.W. (2007). Sodium ion Reports, 2, 4, 202–208. concentration vs. sweat rate relationship in humans. Journal of Applied Physiology, 103, 3, 990–994. 23. Logan-Sprenger, H.M. et al. (2013). Increase in skeletal-muscle glycogenolysis and perceived exertion with progressive dehydration 9. Sawka, M.N., Montain, S.J. & Latzka, W.A. (2001). Hydration effects during cycling in hydrated men. International Journal of Sport on thermoregulation and performance in the heat. Comparative Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 23, 3, 220–229. Biochemistry and Physiology Part A, Molecular & Integrative Physiology, 128, 4, 679–690. 24. Riebe, D. et al. (1997). Effects of oral and intravenous rehydration on ratings of perceived exertion and thirst. Medicine & Science in Sports 10. Convertino, V.A. (1991). Blood volume: Its adaptation to endurance & Exercise, 29, 1, 117–124. training. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 23, 12, 1338– 1348. 25. Jones, L.C. et al. (2008). Active dehydration impairs upper and lower body anaerobic muscular power. Journal of Strength and Conditioning 11. Ikegawa, S. et al. (2011). Effects of hypohydration on Research, 22, 2, 455–463. thermoregulation during exercise before and after 5-day aerobic training in a warm environment in young men. Journal of Applied 26. Judelson, D.A. et al. (2007). Hydration and muscular performance: Physiology, 110, 4, 972–980. Does fluid balance affect strength, power and high-intensity endurance? Sports Medicine, 37, 10, 907–921. 12. Gonzalez-Alonso, J., Mora-Rodriguez, R. & Coyle, E.F. (2000). Stroke volume during exercise: Interaction of environment and hydration. 27. Gopinathan, P.M., Pichan, G. & Sharma, V.M. (1988). Role American Journal of Physiology, Heart and Circulatory Physiology, of dehydration in heat stress-induced variations in mental 278, 2, H321–H330. performance. Archives of Environmental Health, 43, 1, 15–17. 13. Gonzalez-Alonso, J., Calbet, J.A.L. & Nielsen, B. (1998). Muscle 28. Cian, C. et al. (2000). Influence of variations in body hydration blood flow is reduced with dehydration during prolonged exercise in on cognitive function: Effect of hyperhydration, heat stress, and humans. Journal of Physiology-London, 513, 3, 895–905. exercise-induced dehydration. Journal of Psychophysiology, 14, 1, 29–36. 14. Montain, S.J. & Coyle, E.F. (1992). Influence of graded dehydration on hyperthermia and cardiovascular drift during exercise. Journal of 29. Carter, R. 3rd et al. (2006). Hypohydration and prior heat stress Applied Physiology, 73, 4, 1340–1350. exacerbates decreases in cerebral blood flow velocity during standing. Journal of Applied Physiology, 101, 6, 1744–1750. 15. Montain, S.J., Latzka, W.A., & Sawka, M.N. (1995). Control of thermoregulatory sweating is altered by hydration level and exercise intensity. Journal of Applied Physiology, 79, 5, 1434–1439. THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 8 30. Hew-Butler, T. et al. (2015). Statement of the Third International 43. Welsh, R.S. et al. (2002). Carbohydrates and physical/mental Exercise-Associated Hyponatremia Consensus Development performance during intermittent exercise to fatigue. Medicine & Conference, Carlsbad, California, 2015. Clinical Journal of Sport Science in Sports & Exercise, 34, 4, 723–731. Medicine, 25, 4, 303–320. 44. Davis, J.M., Welsh, R.S. & Alerson, N.A. (2000). Effects of 31. O’Brien, K.K. et al. (2001). Hyponatremia associated with carbohydrate and chromium ingestion during intermittent high- overhydration in U.S. Army trainees. Military Medicine, 166, 5, intensity exercise to fatigue. International Journal of Sport Nutrition 405–410. and Exercise Metabolism, 10, 4, 476–485. 32. Montain, S.J., Sawka, M.N. & Wenger, C.B. (2001). Hyponatremia 45. Below, P.R. et al. (1995). Fluid and carbohydrate ingestion associated with exercise: Risk factors and pathogenesis. Exercise independently improve performance during 1 h of intense exercise. and Sport Sciences Reviews, 29, 3, 113–117. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 27, 2, 200–210. 33. Armstrong, L.E. et al. (1993). Symptomatic hyponatremia during 46. Wilmore, J.H. et al. (1998). Role of taste preference on fluid intake prolonged exercise in heat. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, during and after 90 min of running at 60% of VO2max in the heat. 25, 5, 543–549. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 30, 4, 587–595. 34. Speedy, D.B. et al. (1999). Hyponatremia in ultradistance triathletes. 47. Clapp, A.J. et al. (2000). Effects of carbohydrate-electrolyte content Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 31, 6, 809–815. of beverages on voluntary hydration in a simulated industrial environment. American Industrial Hygience Association Journal, 61, 35. Almond, C.S.D. et al. (2005). Hyponatremia among runners in 5, 692–699. the Boston Marathon. New England Journal of Medicine, 352, 15, 1550–1556. 48. Coyle, E.F. & Montain, S.J. (1992). Benefits of fluid replacement with carbohydrate during exercise. Medicine & Science in Sports & 36. Kipps, C., Sharma, S. & Pedoe, D.T. (2011). The incidence of exercise- Exercise, 24, 9, S324–S330. associated hyponatraemia in the London marathon. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 45, 1, 14–19. 49. Gisolfi, C.V., Lambert, G.P. & Summers, R.W. (2001). Intestinal fluid absorption during exercise: Role of sport drink osmolality and [Na+]. 37. Armstrong, L.E. et al. (1997). Thermal and circulatory responses Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 33, 6, 907–915. during exercise: Effects of hypohydration, dehydration, and water intake. Journal of Applied Physiology, 82, 6, 2028–2035. 50. Kenney, W.L. & Chiu, P. (2001). Influence of age on thirst and fluid intake. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 33, 9, 1524–1532. 38. Shirreffs, S.M. et al. (1996). Post-exercise rehydration in man: Effects of volume consumed and drink sodium content. Medicine & Science 51. Bar-Or, O. et al. (1980). Voluntary hypohydration in 10- to 12-year-old in sports & Exercise, 28, 10, 1260–1271. boys. Journal of Applied Physiology: Respiratory, Environmental and Exercise Physiology, 48, 1, 104–108. 39. Latzka, W.A. & Sawka, M.N. (2000). Hyperhydration and glycerol: Thermoregulatory effects during exercise in hot climates. Canadian 52. Wilk, B. & Bar-Or, O. (1996). Effect of drink flavor and NaCL on Journal of Applied Physiology, 25, 6, 536–545. voluntary drinking and hydration in boys exercising in the heat. Journal of Applied Physiology, 80, 4, 1112–1117. 40. Cheuvront, S.N., Haymes, E.M. & Sawka, M.N. (2002). Comparison of sweat loss estimates for women during prolonged high-intensity 53. Rivera-Brown, A.M. et al. (1999). Drink composition, voluntary running. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 34, 8, 1344–1350. drinking, and fluid balance in exercising, trained, heat-acclimatized boys. Journal of Applied Physiology, 86, 1, 78–84. 41. Godek, S.F. et al. (2008). Sweat rates and fluid turnover in professional football players: A comparison of National Football 54. Orenstein, D.M. et al. (1983). Exercise and heat stress in cystic League linemen and backs. Journal of Athletic Training, 43, 2, fibrosis patients. Pediatric Research, 17, 4, 267–269. 184–189. 55. Bar-Or, O. et al. (1992). Voluntary dehydration and heat intolerance 42. Coyle, E.F. et al. (1986). Muscle glycogen utilization during prolonged in cystic fibrosis. Lancet, 339, 8795, 696–699. strenuous exercise when fed carbohydrate. Journal of Applied Physiology, 61, 1, 165–172. THE IMPACT OF HYDRATION ON ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE 9