3388 || FFiittnneessss JJoouurrnnaall MMaayy––JJuunnee 22002200 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + approved QUIZ 3: PAGE 60 PERIODIZATION FOR MAXIMIZING HYPERTROPHY SHOULD YOU PERIODIZE YOUR CLIENTS’ RESISTANCE TRAINING PROGRAMS? BY ZACHARY MANG, MS, JULIET ST. GERMAIN & LEN KRAVITZ, PHD Much of the periodization liter- ature to date has centered on the strength outcomes and sports performance of athletes striving to balance the needs of practice, condi- tioning and competition (Bartolomei et al. 2014). But many recreationally active clients seek to gain muscle size in personal training sessions, and few studies have evaluated whether a periodization model should be used in a hypertrophy-focused resistance training program for these fitness enthusiasts. This article highlights the best research available to help answer an important question: Should you periodize a client’s RT plan to maximize skeletal muscle hypertrophy? >> MMaayy––JJuunnee 22002200 FFiittnneessss JJoouurrnnaall || 3399 Helpful Strategies to Add SOME QUICK DEFINITIONS Variety to a Resistance Resistance training programs consist of numerous Training Program variables, including volume, intensity, frequency, rest intervals, exercise selection and exercise Vary the intensity. Research has shown that order (Williams et al. 2017). Periodization is incorporating a variety of training intensi- defined as a planned, cyclical (i.e., the program ties, such as light (20- to 30-RM), moderate repeats) manipulation of these RT variables (8- to 12-RM) and high (2- to 4-RM), effec- to attain peak performance at specific times tively elicits hypertrophy (Schoenfeld et al. of the year (Evans 2019). Periodized RT plans 2016), empowering you to use a blend of comprise several cycles: loading zones to add variety and keep your a macrocycle (6–12 months); clients engaged. mesocycles (~1 month); and Change the volume. Evidence sug- microcycles (~1 week) (Evans 2019; Issurin gests that low-, moderate- and high-vol- 2010). ume RT are all effective for muscle growth The length of each training cycle in sports will (Schoenfeld et al. 2019). vary, depending on the competition schedule Use tapering and/or overreaching. For and the athlete’s goals. Evans cites research a stimulus change, you may want to periodi- denoting that lengthy periods of training devoid cally implement microcycles with “tapering” of variation will result in stagnation and fatigue. (brief, but meaningful reductions in volume Thus, a major purpose of periodization is to pro- and/or intensity) and/or “overreaching” vide structured variability to combat a plateau (concise but significant increases in volume or decline in physical performance. and/or intensity) (Turner 2011). Change the frequency. Recently, TYPES OF PERIODIZATION researchers concluded that targeting each Researchers have focused their investigations muscle group 2 days a week is an optimal primarily on three types of commonly employed plan for hypertrophy in trained individuals periodization types: linear periodization, block (Grgic, Schoenfeld & Latella 2018). However, periodization and undulating periodization: increasing frequency to 3 days a week in a periodic cycle is a viable strategy for incit- ing a training overload for a client. FIGURE 1. Try reciprocal supersets. With super- Linear (Traditional) sets, you select exercises that target ago- Periodization Model nist/antagonist (e.g., biceps and triceps) or opposite-action (e.g., horizontal flexors and h c si l o o ie r n i n z b t o s e n w f t o a i r l l l e e p t x e a t r e k f i n o n s r g o m r a s t ) r h e m e s t u e s x in c e t l r e e c r i g v s a e ro l s u ( i K p n e s s ; l u l y e c o h c u e e r r s - volume (reps x sets) intensity (% of 1-RM) et al. 2010). Use this style of program to decrease training time and deliver a stron- ger metabolic stress stimulus. You can try s b la e e t v n is e c s r h i a m l p u p r s e u s s d s h o / + r p s s u i e l p l a u c te l o ld d m o r b w o i w n n a , , t a p i n o u d n sh s b , p a in r c e c k s l u s s d q + i u n a g t + training technique specificity hamstring curl. Perform drop sets. In this protocol, load is commonly reduced by 20%–25% GENERAL PHYSICAL SPORT-SPECIFIC COMPETITION with each drop set, allowing minimal rest TRAINING TRAINING before starting the next set. It’s typical to employ 1–3 drop sets, taking 1–3 seconds Note that with an increase in intensity there is a simultaneous on the concentric and eccentric actions decrease in exercise volume. Training technique specificity (Schoenfeld & Grgic 2017). increases in parallel with training intensity. SOURCE: TURNER 2011. 40 | Fitness Journal May–June 2020 This is a general- 12 fitness block periodiza- tion model with 4-week 10 blocks (created by the authors of this article). With this design, the TRANSFORMATION 8 goal is to increase the client’s strength and muscle mass through a 6 progressive increase in training intensity (and decrease in volume) 4 every 4 weeks. Note that weeks 5, 10 and 15 are transition weeks 2 of lighter-intensity exercise. Sets, exercise selection, exercise 0 order and rest between 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 sets would be individu- alized for each client. May–June 2020 Fitness Journal | 41 KEEW NOITISNART KEEW NOITISNART KEEW NOITISNART ACCUMULATION WEEKS SNOITITEPER LINEAR PERIODIZATION Linear periodization (LP) is a training strategy that starts with high volume and low intensity and then progresses to low volume and high intensity (Grgic et al. 2017). LP was introduced in the late 1950s by Russian professor Lev Matveev and is also referred to as traditional periodization (TP) in the literature (Kok, Hamer & Bishop 2009; Bartolomei et al. 2014). With LP, exercisers gradually increase the intensity of load as the program progresses while simultaneously decreasing the volume (see Figure 1). Theoretically, the initial high-volume phase emphasizes hypertrophic adaptations, and the later high-intensity period challenges the neural mechanisms in the body (Kok, Hamer & Bishop 2009). Note in Figure 1 how training technique specificity increases in parallel with training intensity in the LP model. Certainly, LP program designs vary among personal trainers, but it’s common to make changes to volume and intensity every 4 weeks (Grgic et al. 2017). BLOCK PERIODIZATION Block periodization (BP) is made up of several mesocycles, each with a concentrated training stimulus for a specific aspect of performance (Bartolomei et al. 2014) (see Figure 2). Each FIGURE 2. Block Periodization Model REALIZATION 10 75% 1-RM 8 6 4 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 KEEW NOITISNART KEEW NOITISNART 70% 1-RM WEEKS SNOITITEPER FIGURE 3. Figures 3 and 4 for daily and weekly undulating Weekly Undulating periodization models). During a WUP program, Periodization Model exercisers cycle through weeks of light-, mod- erate- and high-intensity training. During DUP, 70% 1-RM these intensities vary from day to day. Practically speaking, a client in a DUP program may do a 75% hypertrophy workout, a strength workout and 1-RM a power workout within 1 week. Evans summarizes research indicating that UP 65% 65% programs are likely the best choice for developing 1-RM 1-RM 88% 88% strength in RT programs. McNamara & Stearne 1-RM 1-RM (2010) submit that undulating programs are also advantageous because the design helps 93% 93% to prevent overtraining and mental boredom 1-RM 1-RM while also being easily adaptable to a client’s travel schedule. The frequent changes of vol- ume and intensity in UP programs may induce larger neural adaptations, while concomitantly counteracting fatigue (Pelzer, Ullrich & Pfeiffer 2017). The term undulating refers to the “wave form” representation of intensities when graphed. Note that weeks 5 and 10 are transition weeks. Each intensity in PERIODIZATION AND this example is based on a percentage of the client’s 1-repetition HYPERTROPHY: RESEARCH maximum (1-RM). HIGHLIGHTS ADAPTED FROM BARTOLOMEI ET AL. 2015. Two periodization studies over the past few years have targeted muscle hypertrophy as an mesocycle—or block of time—prepares clients outcome. One study focused on moderately for the next cycle. For sport applications, resistance-trained women and the other on highly mesocycles are arranged into three categories: resistance-trained men. Here are reviews of both: accumulation, transformation and realization (Issurin 2010). The BP training methodology was Undulating introduced in the mid-1980s by Russian scientist Yuri Verchosanskij to meet the changing needs periodization of athletes (Bartolomei et al. 2014). (UP) involves Conventionally, the accumulation block frequent focuses primarily on general aerobic endur- ance, basic muscle strength and foundational alterations of movement techniques (Issurin 2010). During the volume and next transformation block, the athlete performs intensity within specialized muscle-conditioning exercises and practices sport-specific techniques (Issurin 2010). a training Last, the realization block is a pre-competition program. training phase focusing on attaining maximal speed and performance. Each block lasts 2–4 weeks, depending on the program duration and the client’s specific goals (Issurin 2010). UNDULATING PERIODIZATION Undulating periodization (UP) involves frequent alterations of volume and intensity within a training program; these alterations often occur weekly (WUP) and/or daily (DUP) (Evans 2019) (see 42 | Fitness Journal May–June 2020 25 20 15 8–12 REPS 10 2–4 REPS 5 0 MONDAY WEDNESDAY FRIDAY SNOITITEPER FIGURE 4. Unique Advantages Daily Undulating of Periodized Periodization Model Resistance Training 20–30 1 REPS Lifting within the same intensity TO FATIGUE zone over time may lead to stagnation in results (Turner 2011). A periodized program prevents stagnation by continually overload- ing the neuromuscular system with varying intensities. 2 Continual training with primarily heavy loads may lead to undue fatigue, overtraining and soft-tissue TO FATIGUE injury (Turner 2011; Williams et al. 2017). Periodized plans undulate through periods of low, moderate and high volume and intensity to TO FATIGUE prevent overtraining and perfor- mance decrements. 3 In accordance with the S.A.I.D principle (specific adaptations to imposed demands), periodized Note that each workout day has a different intensity. This pattern plans allow personal trainers and continues in subsequent weeks of training. The program follows their clients to program for a variety a repetition-zone intensity design where participants do all exer- of specific training outcomes. 4 cises to momentary muscular fatigue for each specific repetition Brand-new research demonstrates zone (2–4 reps, 8–12 reps, 20–30 reps). that low-intensity RT (30% of 1-RM) ADAPTED FROM SCHOENFELD ET AL. 2016. improves the quality and quantity of mitochondria (i.e., the ATP produc- tion organelles of cells) (Lim et al. 2019). Thus, intentionally including blocks of low intensity will also improve the aerobic capacity of skeletal muscle fibers. 5 Periodized programs easily allow personal trainers to program low-volume tapering and de-load- ing weeks to promote recovery and allow for neuromuscular adapta- tions (Turner 2011). 6 Periodization plans let personal trainers plan for phases of over- reaching (brief microcycles in which volume and/or intensity are ramped up to deliver a strong stimulus for adaptation). May–June 2020 Fitness Journal | 43 TABLE 1. Muscle Thickness MODERATELY RESISTANCE- Increases in Vastus Lateralis TRAINED WOMEN and Rectus Femoris Pelzer, Ullrich & Pfeiffer (2017) conducted very interesting research with 19 female college-aged DAILY TRADITIONAL UNDULATING students, none of whom were competitive ath- MUSCLE PERIODIZATION PERIODIZATION letes. The women had moderate experience in resistance training (averaging approximately proximal VL 19% 14% 28 months). Volunteers had each of their legs randomly assigned to one of two conditions: mid VL 18% 17% daily undulating periodization or traditional distal VL 21% 19% periodization (also called, remember, linear periodization). Participants acted as their own RF 16% 11% controls because both legs were exercised and yet each was assigned a different periodization Researchers measured the vastus lateralis via model. All volunteers trained 3 days per week for ultrasound at 33% (proximal VL), 50% (mid VL) 6 weeks, for a total of 18 sessions, and the only and 66% (distal VL) of thigh length, defined as exercise used was a single-leg knee extension. the distance from the greater trochanter to the The DUP leg varied daily among 40%, 60% articular cleft of the knee joint. They performed and 80% of one-repetition maximum, and the ultrasound scanning of the rectus femoris about TP leg exercised for 2 weeks at each intensity, midway between the anterior superior iliac spine steadily increasing from 40% to 60% to 80% of and the proximal superior border of the patella. 1-RM. Range of motion, volume and time under SOURCE: PELZER, ULLRICH & PFEIFFER 2017. tension were identical between conditions. Participants completed all sets with one leg TABLE 2. Ultrasound before switching to the other leg. There was a Measurement Increases 2.5-minute rest between sets. With Daily Undulating Ultrasound measurements revealed that Periodization Versus both groups significantly increased their vastus Constant Load MEASUREMENT DUP % CSLD % SITE INCREASE INCREASE vastus laterals +7.6% +8.6% biceps +6.6% +5.0% triceps +6.4% +4.2% SOURCE: SCHOENFELD ET AL. 2016. 44 | Fitness Journal May–June 2020 lateralis and rectus femoris thickness (see Table phase. Rest time between sets was 2 minutes. 1) from pre- to posttest. There was no statisti- Seven total-body exercises were performed on cally significant difference in muscle thickness each day of lifting: bench press, military press, between groups (though thickness was slightly latissimus pulldown, seated row, back squat, leg greater with TP). press and knee extension. Muscle thickness was Based on this research, if personal trainers measured via ultrasound for the biceps, triceps are squeezed for time and a client wants to and vastus lateralis at baseline and after 8 weeks see results quickly (e.g., in 4–6 weeks), DUP of RT (see Table 2). and TP are both viable options for delivering Both groups significantly improved muscle a strong hypertrophic stimulus in moderately thickness, and there was no statistical difference trained women. in results between the two protocols. When examining the statistical magnitude of pre- to HIGHLY RESISTANCE-TRAINED MEN posttest change, referred to as the effect size, This suggests Schoenfeld and associates (2016) divided the research team found that DUP produced a highly resistance-trained college-aged males more substantial improvement than CSLD in that the DUP into two pair-matched groups based on their the biceps and triceps. This suggests that the magnitude of squat strength: a constant load (CSLD) group DUP magnitude of difference for the biceps and difference for (n = 9) and a daily undulating periodization triceps is noteworthy. In summary, the study group (n = 10). The CSLD group performed findings indicate that 8 weeks of either DUP or the biceps and moderate-intensity RT (8–12 repetitions) every CSLD training can significantly improve muscular triceps is time they lifted, while the DUP group performed adaptations in trained young men. noteworthy. heavy (2–4 reps), moderate (8–12 reps) and light OVERCOMING THE (20–30 reps) RT on training days. In summary, BIGGEST LIMITATION IN Both groups trained on 3 nonconsecutive days the study PERIODIZATION SCIENCE of the week for 8 weeks. All participants were findings indicate encouraged to perform each set of exercises to The biggest limitation in the periodization sci- the point of momentary failure, defined as an ence is the short length of studies. Fortunately, that 8 weeks inability to complete the movement’s concentric there is a 9-month study conducted by Kraemer of either DUP and associates (2003) for us to review. The or CSLD training researchers divided 30 female collegiate tennis players into three groups: daily undulating peri- can significantly odization, constant load training and a control improve muscu- group (CON). Subjects assigned to DUP and lar adaptations CSLD performed total-body RT 3 days a week for 36 weeks, for a total of 108 sessions, while in trained the CON group did not participate in any RT. young men. With volume (sets  reps) equated, the DUP group rotated through three loading zones (4–6 reps, 8–10 reps and 12–15 reps), while the CSLD group performed RT at the same loading zone (8–10 reps) for the entire study. Of note, for both experimental groups, when a participant was capable of performing the required number of repetitions for three consecutive sets of a par- ticular exercise, the training load was increased in increments of about 2–13 kilograms. Compared with control participants, the two RT groups significantly increased their muscle mass (i.e., fat-free mass) (DUP = +7.1%; CSLD = +3.5%) and decreased their body fat (DUP = -16.6%; CSLD = -8.9%); more favorable results occurred in the DUP group, though there was no statistical difference between DUP and CSLD. To May–June 2020 Fitness Journal | 45 SNOITITEPER Three Periodization Plans ensure long-term (e.g., 9- to 12-month) muscle adaptations, personal trainers are encouraged Do you have a relatively new, untrained client to periodize times of light, moderate and heavy who wants to perform total-body resistance lifting (see Figure 5) in their female clients’ training? Here are three periodized training plans training plans, as the DUP program in this study adapted from the research cited within this arti- showed distinctively impressive results in many cle. Select seven or eight exercises that target physiological parameters. DUP may also promote all major muscle groups and train on 2 noncon- recovery between workouts, target multiple secutive days (e.g., Monday and Thursday). Over energy systems and limit the psychological time, go up to 3 training days (e.g., Monday/ burnout associated with performing the same Wednesday/Friday), increasing frequency and routine every day. volume concurrently by repeating the Day 1 or Day 2 workout on a nonconsecutive day. INTRODUCING FLEXIBLE PERIODIZATION: A LINEAR PERIODIZATION NEW PERIODIZATION Volume decreases, and intensity increases. APPROACH Changes are made every 4 weeks. As every personal trainer knows, life brings TRAINING TOTAL BODY: TOTAL BODY: unexpected twists that can cause clients undue OUTCOME DAY 1 DAY 2 stress, potentially interfering with their ability to endurance: 2 sets x 2 sets x perform at their optimal level. Smaller setbacks weeks 1–4 15–20 reps 15–20 reps can be disruptive, too: A poor night of sleep, hypertrophy: 3 sets x 3 sets x less than formidable pre-exercise nutrition or weeks 5–8 8–12 reps 8–12 reps one skipped meal may leave a client feeling strength: 4 sets x 4 sets x weeks 9–12 4–6 reps 4–6 reps fatigued and unmotivated, even before the training session begins. In these situations, it may be best to modify the workout of the day WEEKLY UNDULATED PERIODIZATION to accommodate your client’s energy level and olume and intensity vary from week to week. TRAINING TOTAL BODY: TOTAL BODY: FIGURE 5. OUTCOME DAY 1 DAY 2 Daily Undulating endurance: 2 sets x 2 sets x Periodization Model With weeks 1, 4, 7, 10 15–20 reps 15–20 reps Women Tennis Players hypertrophy: 3 sets x 3 sets x 12–15 weeks 2, 5, 8, 11 8–12 reps 8–12 reps 14 REPS strength: 4 sets x 4 sets x 12 weeks 3, 6, 9, 12 4–6 reps 4–6 reps 8–10 10 REPS BLOCK PERIODIZATION Each block has a specific training outcome. 8 Intensity increases over time. TOTAL BODY: TOTAL BODY: 4–6 BLOCKS DAY 1 DAY 2 6 REPS accumulation: 3–4 sets x 2–3 sets x 5 weeks 8–12 reps 8–12 reps 4 transformation: 4–5 sets x 3–4 sets x 5 weeks 4–6 reps 4–6 reps 2 realization: 5–6 sets x 4–5 sets x 2 weeks 1–3 reps 1–3 reps 0 MONDAY WEDNESDAY FRIDAY ADAPTED FROM KRAEMER ET AL. 2003. 46 | Fitness Journal May–June 2020 Take the Quiz ideafit.com/ifjquiz or mail the quiz on page 60 FIGURE 6. mood. You can do this by employing flexible Key Physiological and Mental Benefits undulating periodization. of Periodization Training Flexible undulating periodization (FUP) is a transient strategy for adapting a periodization helps to prevent mental program to a client’s immediate health, nutri- boredom and fatigue tion or energy-level circumstance. In a 12-week avoids training promotes continual training study by McNamara and Stearne (2010), stagnation improvement in hypertrophy researchers randomly assigned 16 untrained promotes continual resistance participants (ages 18–23; males, n = improvement in can be easily muscular strength modified 12; females, n = 4) to a FUP resistance training group (n = 8) or an undulating periodization promotes continual can enhance improvement in recovery training group. Twice-weekly 30-minute workouts muscular endurance combined free-weight and machine exercises. can maximize can readily incorporate adaptation of Both groups completed the same training vol- overreaching cycles all fiber types ume using three intensity loads: 10-RM, 15-RM and 20-RM. However, the FUP group was given the freedom to choose which days they would the year to provide variety for your clients. perform the 10-RM, 15-RM and 20-RM loads Importantly, whichever periodization model you of the various upper-body and lower-body choose, the research provides a steadfast find- exercises. Researchers took pre- and posttest ing that optimal muscle and neural adaptations measurements for the chest press, leg press over the long run occur when the physiological and standing long jump. training stress changes regularly. So be creative Compared with the volume-matched undu- and, yes, definitely periodize! lating group, FUP participants showed similar improvements in the chest press and standing Zachary Mang, MS, is a doctoral student in exer- long jump. In the leg press, however, FUP par- cise science at the University of New Mexico in Fitness ticipants saw a much greater strength increase Albuquerque, where he works as a teaching assis- professionals (+62 kilograms) than the UP group (+16 kg). tant in the human performance lab. His research McNamara and Stearne submit that flexible interests include resistance training for skeletal can easily undulating periodization is a highly personalized muscle hypertrophy, oxidative adaptations to employ FUP program that adjusts workload to correspond resistance training, and the utilization of resistance by simply with a client’s workout energy level or demeanor. training as a frontline defense to thwart chronic Fitness professionals can easily employ FUP by disease. assessing the simply assessing the present state of their client present state immediately before the training session and Juliet St. Germain graduated summa cum laude of their client adjusting the workout accordingly. Ultimately, from the University of New Mexico exercise sci- a FUP approach accounts for a client’s daily ence program and is currently a physical therapy immediately fluctuations in fatigue and psychological read- student at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff, before the iness. Logically, FUP may also increase exercise Arizona. Her research interests include resistance training adherence by providing the client with auton- training for skeletal muscle hypertrophy, exercise omy and the freedom to direct training sessions for clinical populations, and physical therapy reha- session and based on his or her physiological status and/or bilitation for patients with cardiovascular and neu- adjusting mental demeanor. rological disease. the workout CONCLUSION Len Kravitz, PhD, CSCS, is the program coordina- accordingly. Periodized resistance training delivers many tor of exercise science at the Uni versity of New essential physiological and mental health bene- Mexico, where he has received the Out standing fits (see Figure 6). Several studies indicate that Teacher of the Year and Presidential Award of linear periodization, undulating periodization and Distinction. His third book is HIIT Your Limit block periodization are all effective for attaining (Amazon 2018). hypertrophy goals. You may want to consider © 2020 by IDEA Health & Fitness Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduction employing each of these periodization types (as without permission is strictly prohibited. well as flexible undulating periodization) during References available on ideafit.com. May–June 2020 Fitness Journal | 47 References Bartolomei, S., et al. 2014. A comparison of traditional and block periodized strength training programs in trained athletes. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 28 (4), 990–97. Evans, J.W. 2019. Periodized resistance training for enhancing skeletal muscle hypertrophy and strength: A mini-review. Frontiers in Physiology, 10 (13), 1–7. Grgic, J., & Schoenfeld, B.J. 2018. Are the hypertrophic adaptations to high and low-load resistance training muscle fiber type specific? Frontiers in Physiology, 9 (42), 1–6. Grgic, J., Schoenfeld, B.J., & Latella, C. 2018. Resistance training frequency and skeletal muscle hypertrophy: A review of available evidence. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport, 22 (3), 361–70. Grgic, J., et al. 2017. Effects of linear and daily undulating periodized resis- tance training programs on measure of muscle hypertrophy: A system- atic review and meta-analysis. PeerJ, 5:e3695: doi:10.7717/peerj.3695. Issurin, V.B. 2010. New horizons for the methodology and physiology of training periodization. Sports Medicine, 40 (3), 189–206. Kelleher, A.R., et al. 2010. The metabolic costs of reciprocal supersets vs. traditional resistance exercise in young recreationally active adults. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 24 (4), 1043–51. Kok, L.Y., Hamer, P.W., & Bishop, D.J. 2009. Enhancing muscular qualities in untrained women: Linear versus undulated periodization. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 41 (9), 1797–1807. Kraemer, W.J., et al. 2003. Physiological changes with periodized resis- tance training in women tennis players. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 35 (1), 157–68. Lim, C., et al. 2019. Resistance exercise-induced changes in muscle metab- olism are load-dependent. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 51 (12), 2578–85. McNamara, J.M., & Stearne, D.J. 2010. Flexible nonlinear periodization in a beginner college weight training class. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 24 (8), 2012–17. Pelzer, T., Ullrich, B., & Pfeiffer, M. 2017. Periodization effects during short- term resistance training with equated exercise variables in females. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 117, 441–54. Schoenfeld, B.J., & Grgic, J. 2017. Can drop set training enhance muscle growth? Strength and Conditioning Journal, 40 (6), 95–98. Schoenfeld, B.J., et al. 2016. Effects of varied versus constant loading zones on muscular adaptations in trained men. International Journal of Sports Medicine, 37 (6), 442–7. Schoenfeld, B.J., et al. 2019. Resistance training volume enhances mus- cle hypertrophy but not strength in trained men. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 51 (1), 94–103. Turner, A. 2011. The science and practice of periodization: A brief review. Strength and Conditioning Journal, 33 (1), 34–46. Williams, T.D., et al. 2017. Comparison of periodized and non-periodized resistance training on maximal strength: A meta-analysis. Sports Medicine, 47 (10), 2083–2100.