THE NASM GUIDE TO CREATINE FOR WELLNESS AND LONGEVITY © National Academy of Sports Medicine 2023. All Rights Reserved. Reproduction without Permission is Prohibited. Contents Welcome 1 About NASM 1 Getting the Most From This Guide 1 Introduction 2 Creatine History 2 What is Creatine 3 How to Take Creatine 5 Creatine Safety 7 Creatine’s Benefits 8 Summary 12 Resources 13 About the Author 14 References 16 Disclaimer Disclaimer The content in this guide is intended to be used for informational purposes only. It is not to be used to diagnose or treat any medical condition or disease, and not to replace guidance from licensed healthcare provider. The content in this guide is intended to be used for informational purposes only. It is not to be used to diagnose or treat any medical condition or disease, and not to replace guidance from licensed healthcare provider. NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Welcome! Welcome to the National Academy of Sports Medicine’s guide to Creatine for Wellness and Longevity. We hope you find the provided framework and strategies empower you to pursue your wellness goals with clarity and direction. Knowing where to start when working on your well-being can be challenging, especially if you feel overwhelmed by all the available options and resources. Creatine is a much- studied and versatile supplement with emerging positive health effects beyond its traditional use for muscular development, strength, and performance. This guide will provide information on creatine’s benefits beyond these uses that can help you decide if it is right for your supplement routine. About NASM The National Academy of Sports Medicine is the leader in educating and credentialing fitness, wellness, and performance professionals across the globe. NASM provides valid, up-to-date learning content on topics that improve the health and well-being of those they serve. We pride ourselves in creating practical content you can apply right away. Learn more at www.nasm.org, your favorite social media platform, or wherever you listen to podcasts. Getting the Most from This Guide This guide will walk you through information explaining what creatine is, how it works, how to take it, and its possible benefits. We’ll make sense of the large volume of information available on creatine, so you won’t have to. Then, you’ll be equipped with actionable steps to apply whenever you like. Come back and use the information as a reference at any time. Be sure to return to the FAQs in the Resources section whenever you need a quick refresher on the content. Do not feel obligated to put everything into action right away. Most importantly, be patient with yourself and your journey. A little self-compassion goes a long way. 1 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Introduction Creatine is a well-established dietary supplement to enhance exercise performance. A growing body of research is making a solid case for creatine to be one of the best supplements for overall health and wellness across the lifespan. Despite the strong scientific rationale and well-documented benefits, numerous misconceptions and myths persist. So, let’s start with some basics before exploring the latest scientific discoveries. Creatine History Creatine was first isolated and extracted from phosphocreatine and used to make energy. Dr. meat nearly 200 years ago in 1832 by a French Harris discovered that following a short-term philosopher and scientist, Michel Eugene supplementation regimen of 20 grams daily for Chevreul, who is considered the founder of six days dramatically increased the amount of modern organic chemistry. The first creatine creatine and phosphocreatine in the muscle. supplementation study was conducted in 1926 This was the first evidence that making a simple (Chanutin & Guy, 1926). The author and his dietary change could increase the capacity of this assistant ingested 10 grams of creatine per day energy system. These pioneering researchers and and discovered that “during the first few days of findings have greatly influenced creatine research creatine feeding, its retention by the body [was] and have played a vital role in what we currently striking.” This incredible discovery provided the know about creatine supplementation. first evidence that the body could absorb and store ingested creatine. However, the benefits CHECK IT OUT of retaining creatine were not known until nearly 70 years later, in the 1990s, when Drs. Roger Creatine’s name is derived from the Greek Harris and Eric Hultman revealed that creatine word for flesh. was being retained primarily (~95%) within the muscles and that creatine can be converted to 2 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE What is Creatine? Creatine is comprised of three amino acids: vegetarians), they will see more significant arginine, glycine, and methionine. Understanding increases following supplementation and weight these amino acids’ chemical and molecular training on gains in muscle mass and performance structure is not critical to reaping their benefits. (Burke et al., 2003). One question that often The important part is that creatine is not a steroid, emerges is whether creatine supplements are despite what is often claimed on social media. If derived from animal products, and the answer is you ingest protein, you are ingesting amino acids. no. Creatine supplements are synthesized from There is a common fear that creatine will destroy non-animal products, so vegans and vegetarians your liver and kidneys. The reality is your body can take them. However, even if you are an is currently making creatine. Every person on this omnivore or eat meat, your cells will still not be planet already has creatine within their bodies, saturated with creatine from your diet alone. and this molecule plays a critical role in the body Following supplementation, you will get about a to support proper functioning and enhance 20% increase in total creatine (free creatine and overall health. phosphocreatine) within your muscles (Kreider et al., 2017). Why do we need a supplement if the body can make it? The short answer is that your body can only make creatine at a limited rate (about 1 gram per day), and if you want your cells to function at their best, then creatine-containing foods or supplements will help. Red meat, seafood (e.g., herring and salmon), and chicken are all great food sources of dietary creatine. However, to achieve 5 grams of creatine from these food sources, you would have to eat a considerable amount. For example, you would have to consume 1.1 pounds of herring or 2.5 pounds of salmon daily. This is not sustainable, and is why nearly everyone can benefit from creatine supplements. Further, suppose you are a vegan or vegetarian. In that case, you will be missing out on these creatine-containing foods, and it is well- established that vegans and vegetarians have lower amounts of creatine within their muscles. The good news is that vegans or vegetarians are physiologically more responsive to taking a creatine supplement (Kaviani et al., 2020). If one has lower muscle creatine levels (e.g., 3 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE How Does Creatine Work? This section is technical but stick with it. A molecule This phosphocreatine system is one way our bodies called adenosine triphosphate (abbreviated ATP) is maintain our ability to perform movement. Besides the energy currency within a cell. The name refers the phosphocreatine system, bodies have other to its structure: an adenosine molecule with three fuels and energy systems in the muscle that can phosphates attached, hence the triphosphate. remake ATP molecules. Each of these systems has Anytime a cell requires energy, it will break down, differences in ATP production speed and capacity. or “spend,” an ATP molecule. During spending, Ultimately, the body must make ATP molecules one of the three phosphate groups drops off. And at the same rate at which it uses them. Cells will a spent ATP molecule is now called adenosine not work optimally if the body cannot match ATP diphosphate (ADP). Think of creatine as a wallet needs with production. This can create stress on of extra phosphate groups. When this creatine the cells and lead to several problems, such as wallet has phosphates within it, it is considered fatigue in the short term or accelerated aging over phosphocreatine. It loans a phosphate group to the long term. an ADP molecule, and boom, you have ATP again, ready to spend. Figure 1. ATP Phosphocreatine Shuttle So, why is having more creatine and phosphocreatine in muscles advantageous, and how does creatine work within a cell? The answer is that compared to other energy systems, phosphocreatine can replace ATP very quickly, and it does this without the requirement of oxygen. Therefore, the phosphocreatine energy system is critical when cells are under a lot of stress and quickly use energy (and therefore ATP). It is perfect for explosive activities like intense exercise or strength training. However, it is also important for activities where you shift from being relatively still to moving, like standing up from a chair. This energy system could also be critical when the heart or brain are deprived of oxygen, such as during a stroke or heart attack. Having more creatine or phosphocreatine gives cells a greater capacity to make energy quickly (Forbes et al., 2020), respond to environmental changes, and mitigate the amount of stress on your cells. There is evidence that creatine acts as an antioxidant and reduces inflammation, again showing that creatine can reduce cellular stress. 4 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE How to Take Creatine There are several scientifically proven strategies to take creatine. However, the dose will depend on your goals and the tissue you are trying to improve (e.g., bone, brain, muscle, heart). Figure 2. Creatine Intake Strategies Î Strategy 1: Loading Protocol: The most Î Strategy 2: Low Dose Protocol: Another common protocol includes a “loading phase,” strategy that may be easier on your stomach which is typically taking 20 grams per day split and is just as effective from a muscle into four different servings (5 grams each in perspective is skipping the loading phase the morning, at lunch, at dinner, and before entirely and taking 3 to 5 grams of creatine bedtime for a total of 20 grams) and you will do daily. This strategy will saturate your muscles this daily for one week. Following this loading with creatine to the same level; it just takes a phase, you will only require 3 to 5 grams daily bit longer (28 days compared to 1 week). to maintain those elevated creatine levels. This loading strategy is very effective; however, only some of the ingested creatine is taken up by the muscles. Some people (albeit very rare) may experience some stomach discomfort when taking 20 grams daily. 5 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Î Strategy 3: Relative Dosing Protocol: The have specific health goals to enhance bone final strategy is taking a relative dose of (we will discuss that below). creatine based on your body weight, or 0.1 All three strategies are equally effective at grams per kilogram of body weight per day. enhancing muscle while strength training. For example, if you weigh 70 kilograms, you However, the scientific literature supports the take 0.1 x 70 or 7 grams of creatine daily. This idea that a higher dose of creatine is optimal for strategy has been used extensively in scientific bone and brain health (Forbes et al., 2021). papers and is excellent for people who are either smaller or larger than average or if you HELPFUL HINT To calculate your weight in kilograms, divide your weight in pounds by 2.2. Optimizing Creatine Ingestion Beyond dosing protocols, there are ways to training, so from a practical perspective, taking maximize creatine absorption and retention. First, creatine at a time that works best for you to take creatine should be ingested with carbohydrate it consistently (such as with a protein shake) will and protein sources. Both nutrients will stimulate suffice (Forbes et al., 2021). On rest days or if you insulin and help your muscles take up creatine do not engage in structured exercise, you can faster. ingest creatine at any time throughout the day. Additionally, take creatine close to exercise since Other commonly asked questions include what exercise stimulates creatine transporters to take happens when you stop taking creatine or does it up more. This was shown in a unique study. matter when you miss a day of supplementation. Participants exercised one leg and kept the other Once your muscles are saturated, it takes 4 to 6 still using a specialized stationary bike. After weeks to return to baseline; therefore, if you miss exercise, study participants ingested creatine. a day, it will not have any meaningful or negative Researchers found that the exercised leg had effect. Creatine, only taken on days you work out, greater creatine uptake and retention than the is an effective strategy to enhance upper and unexercised one (Robinson et al., 1999). lower body muscle strength and gains in muscle mass compared to placebo (Forbes et al., 2021). Another study reported more significant Collectively, just taking creatine over a period of gains in strength and muscle mass and a more time will lead to enhanced results. See the FAQ in considerable decrease in percentage body fat in the resources section for a summary of common participant groups that ingested creatine closer questions and answers about creatine ingestion to their training time as opposed to 5+ hours in and absorption. other groups (Forbes et al., 2021). There is no difference between taking creatine before or after 6 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Creatine Safety Despite strong scientific support for the safety situations, and there is emerging data, so let’s of creatine, there remain several myths and tackle those next. misconceptions, including that creatine is harmful to your kidneys, causes hair loss, or is not for CRITICAL people assigned female at birth, all of which are entirely untrue (Antonio et al., 2021). Remember Creatine is not a magic pill and should not be that your body naturally produces creatine and used in place of medical treatments. that creatine is found in food sources. However, it is essential to note that an excessive amount of anything could be harmful. Even water can lead to water intoxication! So, please stick to GETTING TECHNICAL the recommended doses outlined previously or as indicated on your supplement bottle. For In typical situations, if a by-product of cre- atine metabolism known as creatinine goes example, in an extreme case, a 27-year-old up, this could indicate kidney dysfunction. bodybuilder reported taking 210 grams per day However, having a large amount of muscle of creatine (22 times the recommended dose) or taking a creatine supplement may increase in addition to anabolic steroids. This resulted in your creatinine levels. Importantly, this does kidney issues, including hardening of the walls of not mean your kidneys are being damaged; the arteries in the kidney and scarring of kidney this is because of normal creatine metabo- tissue (Hartung et al., 2001). lism. Creatine is non-enzymatically degraded to creatinine. Other blood markers, such as In contrast, some individuals exaggerate the Cystatin-C, should be used to assess kidney benefits of creatine. Creatine is not a magic pill or function when taking creatine. The evidence is powder; it can enhance health and performance, strong that taking creatine in the recommend- but it needs to be put in perspective. As such, ed doses is very safe if you are healthy. despite the evidence that creatine is an effective dietary supplement in a variety of situations, creatine should not be used in place of medical treatments, nor will creatine turn someone into a superhero with optimal health! Further, some of the benefits of creatine will only appear when a person is already exercising regularly, ingesting sufficient calories, and meeting their protein requirements. Healthy lifestyle behaviors like sleep and eating real food are critical for optimal health, wellness, and longevity. Creatine is a supplement to a healthy lifestyle, not a replacement for it. The science is clear: creatine can help in various 7 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Creatine’s Benefits Creatine research is multiplying, and despite Muscles use glucose as a fuel to make ATP and most of your creatine being stored within your help to control blood sugar after a meal, thus muscles, creatine is also found in other tissues lowering the risk of diabetes. This is why an often- (e.g., bone, brain) and, therefore has a bearing recommended health tip is to walk after eating a on health beyond just muscle. Originally, creatine meal, activating the muscles and reducing blood supplements were thought of as just for young glucose (Myette-Côté et al., 2018). exercising individuals, mainly bodybuilders wishing to enhance muscle mass and strength. In addition, having stronger muscles is one of Still, there is growing evidence that creatine can the critical determinants of independence later help older adults preserve muscle health and in life. We also know that the average person function as they age (Delpino et al., 2022). starts to lose muscle after age 40, and if they lose too much muscle, it is known as sarcopenia. Sarcopenia can have devasting effects on health and one’s ability to function. The good news is that creatine, combined with strength training, will likely enhance muscle mass and strength. Since a common myth surrounding creatine is that supplementing alone will cause muscle gain, it is important to note that it must be combined with strength training for muscles to benefit. Exercise is crucial for health and longevity, and creatine can help, but only when exercising regularly. The current exercise recommendations are to do strength training twice a week and moderate cardiorespiratory exercise that accumulates to 150 minutes a week (or about 22 minutes a day). In a recent review, it’s clear that creatine must Figure 3. Benefits of Creatine be combined with exercise to enhance muscle mass and strength (R. Burke et al., 2023; Delpino et al., 2022). Specifically, creatine is an effective Muscle Mass and supplement to improve muscle mass and strength (both upper and lower body) in older adults. Strength In addition, creatine combined with strength training can improve muscle function. One test Creatine’s benefits to muscle and strength move to evaluate muscle function is a sit-to-stand well beyond bodybuilding and performance. task, which involves repeatedly sitting down and Skeletal muscle is one of the most critical tissues in standing up. Science is clear that creatine can the body. Muscle mass and the ability to activate help improve this task. Poor sit-to-stand scores muscles is essential for health and longevity. have been associated with an increased risk of 8 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE falls (Lusardi et al., 2017). Therefore, creatine may If we continue with our brick wall comparison, be combined with other strategies to lower the risk creatine may help arrange the bricks to create a of falls. Presently, the evidence is clear: creatine stronger wall. Notably, these benefits were not is one of the most effective dietary supplements found with taking creatine alone without exercise to enhance muscle mass and strength and works (Sales et al., 2020). More research is also needed across the lifespan, and these gains can have a to determine if creatine supplementation may profound bearing on health and wellness. reduce the risk of fractures in older adults. Bone and Body Composition When discussing improving bone health, we often consider bone mineral density. Creatine, however, does not affect bone mineral density but rather the bones’ strength. In theory, creatine affects bone directly since bone cells rely on the phosphocreatine energy system, and creatine increases osteoblast activity in bone cell culture models. If we think of bone as a brick wall, osteoblasts add bricks to the wall, and osteoclasts are cells that remove bricks. If one can increase osteoblast activity, they will build a bigger and stronger wall (i.e., bones). Creatine may also indirectly enhance bone. Creatine is one of the most effective dietary supplements to improve muscle mass and strength. Since muscles What does this all mean based on current pull on tendons and tendons are connected to science? To improve bone strength, the following bones, stronger muscles will transmit greater conditions should be met: tension to the bone, stimulating bone formation Î Because bone tissue turnover is slow, creatine over time. This is how strength training improves and strength training should be combined for bone density. at least 9 months. While creatine may help with bone’s cellular Î The daily dose should be approximately 10 activity and bone formation over time, a review grams per day or the relative dosing strategy of research studies suggests that creatine has no of 0.1 grams per kilogram of body weight significant effect on bone mineral density when (Forbes, Ostojic, et al., 2021). combined with strength training (Forbes et al., 2017). However, it was found that bone geometry (i.e., bone shape) was enhanced by creatine supplementation. Bone geometry may be a better predictor of bone strength than density. 9 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Cognitive Function of oxygen) and may help recovery following a traumatic brain injury or concussion. Although There is emerging evidence that creatine limited, these findings have the potential supplementation can enhance brain creatine to play a critical therapeutic role in certain levels and brain function (Candow et al., 2023; situations, including those with dementia, military Forbes et al., 2022). The brain differs from personnel, first responders (Mattos et al., 2023), muscle because it can synthesize or make its own and those suffering from repeated head impacts, creatine. In addition, it is challenging for creatine such as American Football players (Alosco et to get into the brain and pass the blood-brain al., 2020). Creatine supplementation may help barrier. Creatine, in contrast, is readily taken because these populations exhibit altered brain up by muscle. In an animal study, four weeks of metabolism and lower brain creatine levels. creatine supplementation improved memory, Future research is needed to validate and confirm learning, and mitochondrial function (Snow et al., creatine’s therapeutic benefit. 2018). In humans, there is also a growing body of evidence that creatine can influence brain health, In addition to cognitive function benefits, particularly in older adults (Prokopidis et al., 2023). creatine appears to influence mood, including The most comprehensive review on the topic anxiety and depression (Candow et al., 2023). was recently published, and it noted that higher In a study of over 22,000 US adults, participants doses of creatine for extended periods might be were divided into categories based on how required to achieve brain benefits (Candow et al., much creatine they were getting in their diet. 2023). Researchers noted a significant difference in depression prevalence between the highest and lowest groupings of dietary creatine intake. Put simply, the more creatine you have in your diet, the lower the risk of depression. This relationship is not strong enough in the current scientific literature to suggest creatine as part of a mental health treatment plan, but it does show promise. Future randomized controlled trials are required to determine whether dietary creatine intake or creatine supplementation can reduce the risk of depression. Blood Glucose Management The researchers also pointed out that the effects of creatine may be more robust when the brain The effects of diabetes are well-established. A is stressed. For example, research has shown lesser-known effect of creatine is its ability to that creatine can help your brain function better increase the number of glucose transporters compared to placebo following sleep deprivation, (GLUT-4) in a muscle cell. Currently, only a mental fatigue, or during hypoxia (a low amount couple of studies have investigated the effects of 10 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE creatine supplementation in individuals with type however, limited data exists (Balestrino, 2021). 2 diabetes. Interestingly, five days of creatine There is clear evidence that creatine can improve supplementation of 6 grams per day had a heart failure patients’ muscle health (strength and similar impact on lowering blood glucose (sugar) endurance). Therefore, creatine can ameliorate compared to metformin (a commonly prescribed muscle weakness typically associated with this blood sugar lowering drug) (Rocic et al., 2009). In condition (Balestrino, 2021). another study that included 25 participants with diabetes, creatine supplementation of 5 grams Summary per day in conjunction with an exercise program for 12 weeks, HbA1c was reduced in the creatine group compared to placebo (Gualano et al., 2011). HbA1c is a blood marker representing an Overall, there are several emerging and average blood glucose level over the past 2 to promising benefits of creatine supplementation 3 months. Overall, there is promising evidence to enhance health and wellness, particularly in that creatine enhances glucose control. However, an aging population. Creatine combined with caution is warranted due to the small sample strength training enhances muscle health (muscle sizes and limited studies. As mentioned before, mass, strength, and function) and bone health creatine is not a supplement that solves health in older adults. It is important to remember that problems but a beneficial additive to an already creatine supplementation must be combined with healthy lifestyle. strength training to reap these benefits. Creatine supplementation also appears to enhance cognitive function or brain health, blood glucose Heart Health management, and heart health. Again, the recommendations would be to combine creatine Another emerging area of research is with exercise, albeit there is some evidence that investigating creatine’s role in heart health. The creatine may be of some benefit when provided heart contains a high concentration of creatine. alone, such as improving memory in older adults This is due to the importance of creatine acting (Candow et al., 2023; Prokopidis et al., 2023). as an energy buffer during stress. For example, Creatine is also very safe and effective (Rawson, during ischemia (reduction of blood flow and 2018). Notably, a higher dose of creatine of 10 oxygen), it is possible to support heart tissue grams per day may be required to achieve several with the creatine energy system. However, since health benefits (bone, brain, and heart), whereas there are fewer creatine transporters in the heart, 5 grams per day is adequate to enhance muscle increasing creatine content (like in the brain) is health. Therefore, the amount you ingest may vary challenging. Based on the available literature in based on your individual goals. Lastly, the scientific both human and animal models, creatine content evidence is clear that creatine monohydrate is the can be increased, but a higher dose of creatine safest and most effective form of creatine (Forbes over a more extended period is required. In et al., 2021; Kreider et al., 2017). healthy individuals, creatine supplementation has no detrimental effect on cardiac function. In addition, creatine supplementation has been proposed to enhance heart health in specific situations such as heart failure and heart ischemia; 11 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Resources Below is a convenient set of creatine FAQ that are helpful for reference or quick reminders. TOP 10 COMMON CREATINE QUERIES 1. Which form of creatine is the best? 6. Should I take creatine before or after Creatine monohydrate. While many supplement exercise? companies will try to lure you with fancy It’s up to you. So long as you take it close to an formulations and innovations, nothing beats exercise session, there is no difference between creatine monohydrate regarding safety and taking creatine before or after a workout. effectiveness. 7. Does it matter when I take creatine on 2. How much should I take? non-exercise days? For the positive health effects mentioned here, No. On rest days (or if you do not engage in take 10 grams daily or a daily relative dose of structured exercise), you can ingest creatine 0.1 grams/kg of body weight. anytime throughout the day. 3. If I take creatine for wellness and 8. I’ve noticed my creatine doesn’t always longevity benefits, do I still need to do a dissolve completely in cold water; what loading phase? And do I ever need to take helps? a break from supplementation? Creatine does not have to be 100% dissolved A loading phase is optional and unnecessary to to be absorbed. Creatine does, however, mix reap wellness and longevity benefits. There is more easily in warm water or hot tea. You can no need to take a break unless you experience also try mixing your creatine in juice because the gastrointestinal discomfort. altered pH in juice makes it easier for creatine to dissolve, and the carbohydrates in juice will 4. Should I take creatine with food? enhance creatine uptake- bonus! Food is not required, but creatine ingested with carbohydrate and/or protein sources will 9. What happens when I miss a day? stimulate insulin and help your muscles take up If you miss a day, it will not have any meaningful creatine faster. or negative effect. Overall, simply taking creatine over a period of time will provide 5. Do I need to exercise when I take benefits. creatine, even if I’m taking it for reasons other than bodybuilding, strength, and 10. What happens when I stop taking athletic performance? creatine? Yes. Creatine should be combined with exercise Once your muscles have reached their saturation and strength training to optimize its wellness level, it takes 4 to 6 weeks to return to baseline and longevity benefits. levels. 12 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Key terms Creatine A compound derived from three amino acids, arginine, glycine, and methionine. It can be converted to phosphocreatine and broken down to energy quickly. Phosphocreatine A key component of a system in the body that produces energy rapidly to meet immediate demands. Supplementing with creatine boosts stores of phosphocreatine. Sarcopenia Sarcopenia is an age-related loss of muscle and strength that reduces one’s ability to perform activities of daily living. Osteoblasts Cells that are important in the formation of new bone. Osteoclasts Cells responsible for the breakdown and absorption of bone as part of the normal tissue turnover process. Blood-brain barrier The system of blood vessels and specialized cells that regulate what can enter the brain’s circulation from the body’s general circulation. Randomized Research experiments that control factors not under direct controlled trials study. They are used to measure the effectiveness of an intervention or treatment. 13 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE About the Author Dr. Scott Forbes is a faculty member at Brandon University in Manitoba, Canada. His primary professional and academic interests lie in sports science. He has focused on various nutritional and training interventions to enhance athletic performance. In addition, he has expertise in examining nutritional and exercise interventions for optimal muscle and brain health in older adults. He has worked as a personal trainer and an athlete consultant for several professional and varsity-level sports teams. He serves as Sports Nutrition advisor for the International Society of Sports Nutrition (ISSN). Dr. Forbes is also a prominent and prolific researcher in exercise and sports nutrition sciences, including creatine’s benefits for sport and health, with over 120 articles published in scientific literature. His professional certifications include Certified Sports Nutritionist through ISSN (CISSN), Clinical Exercise Physiologist (CEP), and High Performance Specialist with the Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology (CSEP), and the International Olympic Committee diploma in Sports Nutrition. 14 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE References Alosco, M. L., Tripodis, Y., Rowland, B., Chua, A. S., Journal of Biological Chemistry, 67(1), 29–41. Liao, H., Martin, B., Jarnagin, J., Chaisson, C. E., https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9258(18)84727-5. Pasternak, O., Karmacharya, S., Koerte, I. K., Cantu, Delpino, F. M., Figueiredo, L. M., Forbes, S. C., R. C., Kowall, N. W., McKee, A. C., Shenton, M. E., Candow, D. G., & Santos, H. O. (2022). Influence Greenwald, R., McClean, M., Stern, R. A., & Lin, of age, sex, and type of exercise on the efficacy of A. (2020). A magnetic resonance spectroscopy creatine supplementation on lean body mass: A investigation in symptomatic former NFL players. systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized Brain Imaging and Behavior, 14(5), 1419–1429. clinical trials. Nutrition (Burbank, Los Angeles https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11682- County, Calif.), 103–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 019-00060-4. NUT.2022.111791. Antonio, J., Candow, D. G., Forbes, S. C., Gualano, B., Erickson-Viitanen, Susan; Geiger, Paul; Yang, W. C. T.; Jagim, A. R., Kreider, R. B., Rawson, E. S., Smith- Bessman, Samuel P. (1982), Massry, Shaul G.; Letteri, Ryan, A. E., VanDusseldorp, T. A., Willoughby, D. S., Joseph M.; Ritz, Eberhard (eds.), “The Creatine- & Ziegenfuss, T. N. (2021). Common questions and Creatine Phosphate Shuttle for Energy Transport misconceptions about creatine supplementation: — Compartmentation of Creatine Phosphokinase what does the scientific evidence really show? in Muscle,” Regulation of Phosphate and Mineral Journal of the International Society of Sports Metabolism, Advances in Experimental Medicine Nutrition, 18(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/ and Biology, Springer US, vol. 151, pp. 115–125, s12970-021-00412-w. doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-4259-5_17, ISBN 978-1- 4684-4259-5, PMID 6217725. Balestrino, M. (2021). Role of Creatine in the Heart: Health and Disease. Nutrients, 13(4), 1215. https:// Forbes, S. C., Candow, D. G., Ostojic, S. M., Roberts, doi.org/10.3390/NU13041215. M. D., & Chilibeck, P. D. (2021). Meta-analysis examining the importance of creatine ingestion Burke, D. G., Chilibeck, P. D., Parise, G., Candow, D. strategies on lean tissue mass and strength in older G., Mahoney, D., & Tarnopolsky, M. (2003). Effect of adults. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu13061912. Creatine and Weight Training on Muscle Creatine and Performance in Vegetarians. Medicine and Science Forbes, S. C., Cordingley, D. M., Cornish, S. M., Gualano, in Sports and Exercise, 35(11), 1946–1955. https:// B., Roschel, H., Ostojic, S. M., Rawson, E. S., Roy, doi.org/10.1249/01.MSS.0000093614.17517.79. B. D., Prokopidis, K., Giannos, P., & Candow, D. G. (2022). Effects of Creatine Supplementation on Burke, R., Piñero, A., Coleman, M., Mohan, A., Brain Function and Health. Nutrients, 14(5), 921. Sapuppo, M., Augustin, F., Aragon, A. A., Candow, https://doi.org/10.3390/NU14050921. D. G., Forbes, S. C., Swinton, P., & Schoenfeld, B. J. (2023). The Effects of Creatine Supplementation Forbes, S. C., Krentz, J. R., & Candow, D. G. (2021). Combined with Resistance Training on Regional Timing of creatine supplementation does not Measures of Muscle Hypertrophy: A Systematic influence gains in unilateral muscle hypertrophy or Review with Meta-analysis. Nutrients, 15(9), 2116. strength from resistance training in young adults: https://doi.org/10.3390/NU15092116. a within-subject design. The Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness, 61(9), 1219–1225. Candow, D. G., Forbes, S. C., Ostojic, S. M., Prokopidis, https://doi.org/10.23736/S0022-4707.20.11668-2. K., Stock, M. S., Harmon, K. K., & Faulkner, P. (2023). “Heads Up” for Creatine Supplementation Forbes, S. C., Ostojic, S. M., Souza-Junior, T. P., & and its Potential Applications for Brain Health and Candow, D. G. (2021). A high dose of creatine Function. Sports Medicine (Auckland, N.Z.). https:// combined with resistance training appears to be doi.org/10.1007/S40279-023-01870-9. required to augment indices of bone health in older adults. Annals of Nutrition & Metabolism. https:// Candow, D. G., Forbes, S. C., Roberts, M. D., Roy, doi.org/10.1159/000520967. B. D., Antonio, J., Smith-Ryan, A. E., Rawson, E. S., Gualano, B., & Roschel, H. (2022). Creatine Forbes, S. C., Sletten, N., Durrer, C., Myette-Côté, O’Clock: Does Timing of Ingestion Really Influence É., Candow, D., & Little, J. P. (2017). Creatine Muscle Mass and Performance? Frontiers in Sports Monohydrate Supplementation Does Not Augment and Active Living, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/ Fitness, Performance, or Body Composition FSPOR.2022.893714. Adaptations in Response to Four Weeks of High- Intensity Interval Training in Young Females. Chanutin, A., & Guy, L. P. (1926). THE FATE OF International Journal of Sport Nutrition and CREATINE WHEN ADMINISTERED TO MAN. 15 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SPORTS MEDICINE Exercise Metabolism, 27(3), 285–292. https://doi. Myette-Côté, É., Durrer, C., Neudorf, H., Bammert, T. org/10.1123/IJSNEM.2016-0129. D., Botezelli, J. D., Johnson, J. D., Desouza, C. A., & Little, J. P. (2018). The effect of a short-term low- Forbes, S., Candow, D., Smith-Ryan, A., Hirsch, K., carbohydrate, high-fat diet with or without postmeal Roberts, M., VanDusseldorp, T., Stratton, M., walks on glycemic control and inflammation in Kaviani, M., & Little, J. (2020). Supplements and type 2 diabetes: a randomized trial. American nutritional interventions to augment high-intensity Journal of Physiology. Regulatory, Integrative and interval training physiological and performance Comparative Physiology, 315(6), R1210–R1219. adaptations: A narrative review. Nutrients, 12(2). https://doi.org/10.1152/AJPREGU.00240.2018. https://doi.org/10.3390/NU12020390. Prokopidis, K., Giannos, P., Triantafyllidis, K. K., Gualano B., DE Salles Painneli V., Roschel H., Artioli Kechagias, K. S., Forbes, S. C., & Candow, D. G.G., Neves M. Jr., De Sá Pinto A.L., Da Silva M.E., G. (2023). Author’s reply: Letter to the Editor: Cunha M.R., Otaduy M.C., Leite Cda C., Ferreira Double counting due to inadequate statistics J.C., Pereira R.M., Brum P.C., Bonfá E., & Lancha leads to false-positive findings in “Effects of A.H. Jr. (2011). Creatine in type 2 diabetes: a creatine supplementation on memory in healthy randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled individuals: a systematic review and meta-analysis trial. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 43(5), 770-778. https:// of randomized controlled trials.” Nutrition Reviews. doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181fcee7d. PMID: https://doi.org/10.1093/NUTRIT/NUAC111. 20881878. Rawson, E. S. (2018). The Safety and Efficacy of Creatine Hartung, R., Gerth, J., Funfstück, R., Gröne, H. J., Monohydrate Supplementation : What We Have & Stein, G. (2001). End‐stage renal disease in a Learned From the Past 25 Years of Research. Sports bodybuilder: a multifactorial process or simply Science Exchange, 29(186), 1–6. doping? Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation, 16(1), 163–165. https://doi.org/10.1093/NDT/16.1.163. Robinson, T. M., Sewell, D. A., Hultman, E., & Greenhaff, P. L. (1999). Role of submaximal exercise Kaviani, M., Shaw, K., & Chilibeck, P. (2020). Benefits in promoting creatine and glycogen accumulation of Creatine Supplementation for Vegetarians in human skeletal muscle. Journal of Applied Compared to Omnivorous Athletes: A Systematic Physiology (Bethesda, Md. : 1985), 87(2), 598–604. Review. International Journal of Environmental https://doi.org/10.1152/JAPPL.1999.87.2.598. Research and Public Health, 17(9), 3041. https:// doi.org/10.3390/IJERPH17093041. Rocic B., Bajuk N.B., Rocic P., Weber D.S., Boras J., & Lovrencic M.V.(2009). Comparison of Kreider, R., Kalman, D., Antonio, J., Ziegenfuss, T., antihyperglycemic effects of creatine and metformin Wildman, R., Collins, R., Candow, D., Kleiner, S., in type II diabetic patients. Clin Invest Med, 32(6), Almada, A., & Lopez, H. (2017). International Society E322. https://doi.org/10.25011/cim.v32i6.10669. of Sports Nutrition position stand: safety and efficacy PMID: 20003839. of creatine supplementation in exercise, sport, and medicine. Journal of the International Society of Sales, L. P., Pinto, A. J., Rodrigues, S. F., Alvarenga, J. Sports Nutrition, 14(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/ C., Gonçalves, N., Sampaio-Barros, M. M., Benatti, S12970-017-0173-Z. F. B., Gualano, B., & Rodrigues Pereira, R. M. (2020). Creatine Supplementation (3 g/d) and Bone Health Lusardi, M. M., Fritz, S., Middleton, A., Allison, L., in Older Women: A 2-Year, Randomized, Placebo- Wingood, M., Phillips, E., Criss, M., Verma, S., Controlled Trial. The Journals of Gerontology: Osborne, J., & Chui, K. K. (2017). Determining Risk Series A, 75(5), 931–938. https://doi.org/10.1093/ of Falls in Community Dwelling Older Adults: A GERONA/GLZ162. Systematic Review and Meta-analysis Using Posttest Probability. Journal of Geriatric Physical Therapy Snow, W. M., Cadonic, C., Cortes-Perez, C., Roy (2001), 40(1), 1–36. https://doi.org/10.1519/ Chowdhury, S. K., Djordjevic, J., Thomson, E., JPT.0000000000000099. Bernstein, M. J., Suh, M., Fernyhough, P., & Albensi, B. C. (2018). Chronic dietary creatine Mattos, D., Santos, C. G. M., Forbes, S. C., Candow, enhances hippocampal-dependent spatial memory, D. G., Rosa, D., Busnardo, R. G., Ribeiro, M. D., bioenergetics, and levels of plasticity-related Paulucio, D., Chester, C., & Machado, M. (2023). proteins associated with NF-‐B. Learning & Memory Individual Responses to Creatine Supplementation (Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.), 25(2), 54–66. https://doi. on Muscular Power is Modulated by Gene org/10.1101/LM.046284.117. Polymorphisms in Military Recruits. Journal of Science in Sport and Exercise, 5(1), 70–76. https:// link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s42978-022- 00165-1. 16 THANKS FOR READING!