Editorial Navigating AMR with innovative diagnostics 300 years ago, as the European colonial powers vied for that incorporates antibiotic susceptibility testing could For more on modifiable drivers influence and trade by sea, naval leaders were grappling potentially be a game-changer. However, despite its of antimicrobial resistance see Series Lancet 2016; 387: 176–87 with the challenge of determining their ships’ east– approval by the European Medicines Agency, the stated For the announcement of the west position in the absence of accurate instruments. robustness of the device, and its relatively low need for winner of the Longitude Prize for AMR see https:// In recognition of the significance of the problem, not maintenance, several hurdles lie in the way of roll-out of challengeworks.org/challenge- just for profits but for sailors’ lives, the UK Parliament PA-100 to LMICs, and a presumed resultant decrease in prizes/longitude-prize/ passed the Longitude Act of 1714, which established inappropriate antibiotic use and reduced AMR. For the latest WHO Essential Diagnostics List see https://iris. a monetary reward of up to £20 000 (£1·5 million Cost is an obvious barrier, and Sysmex Astrego says who.int/bitstream/handle/ today) “for such Person or Persons as shall Discover the it will use its prize money to scale up and improve 10665/373322/978924 0081093-eng.pdf Longitude at Sea”. Amateur horologist John Harrison production processes, and potentially to design a For the sensitivity and notably received more than £10 000 between 1730 and different cartridge that is better suited to the pathogen specificity of PA-100 see https:// 1770 for his series of portable clocks. profiles across different regions. Appropriate use is link.springer.com/article/10.1007/ s10096-024-04862-3 Global health is not short of challenges, most of which another barrier. As noted in the recent Lancet Series For the Lancet Series on AMR see are multifaceted, context-dependent, and somewhat on AMR, such is the relative affordability of many https://www.thelancet.com/ series/antibiotic-resistance amorphous. Yet one clearly defined measurement antibiotics that, in contexts where out-of-pocket For the Lancet Commission on challenge that is analogous to the longitude problem payment is the norm, patients are more likely to opt to diagnostics see The Lancet is that of rapidly, accurately, and affordably detecting pay for a cheap, broad-spectrum antibiotic than for a Commissions Lancet 2021; 398: 1997–2050 whether a patient has a bacterial infection and—if diagnostic test followed by a potentially more expensive For the newborn survival prize so—which antibiotic would be the most appropriate drug. Diagnostics must be brought into wider antibiotic see https://challengeworks.org/ challenge-prizes/newborn- to treat it. Overuse (including empirical use) or misuse stewardship and universal health coverage efforts, survival-prize/ of antibiotics is thought to be the greatest modifiable coupled with context-specific awareness campaigns. For the zero draft of the UN driver of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) worldwide. In In 2021, the Lancet Commission on diagnostics political declaration on AMR see https://www.un.org/pga/wp- 2014, after a public vote on the choice of focus, the UK concluded that “the over-riding reason for the poor content/uploads/ innovation agency Nesta launched a new £8 million global access to diagnostics has been the relatively low sites/108/2024/05/20240520- AMR-Political-Declaration-Zero- Longitude Prize for AMR. This month, the winner was attention and priority given to diagnostics by policy Draft_FINAL.pdf finally announced. makers and funders”. The Longitude Prize for AMR The PA-100 AST System (Sysmex Astrego, Uppsala, was an innovative means to circumvent this issue, Sweden) passed all seven mandatory judging criteria motivating academics to advance nascent research work (ie, needed, accurate, affordable, rapid, easy-to-use, into full-scale device development. Alongside other scalable, and safe) after a 6-year appraisal process, prize challenges, Nesta has now announced a new prize, adjudicated by an independent Prize Advisory Panel. to establish diagnostics for sepsis in neonates in LMICs. The cartridge-based analyser uses phase-contrast Entrants can be working in any country, but they must microscopy and nanofluidics to detect the presence of establish relationships with district hospitals in LMICs. bacteria in urine in less than 15 min and susceptibility of We are particularly encouraged by the emphasis placed the bacteria to five commonly prescribed antibiotics for on engagement with individuals with lived experience the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract infections of the problem and the stipulation that the criteria for in 45 min. success will be set by neonatologists working in LMICs. Dipstick-based urinalysis tests are on WHO’s Essential In September, the UN General Assembly will hold its Diagnostics List, but their sensitivity is typically less second High-Level Meeting on AMR. The zero draft than 50%, making just-in-case prescribing of antibiotics of the associated political declaration rightly couples likely. Given this problem, and the scarce availability antibiotics with diagnostics in many of its clauses. Let of bacteriological culture testing in many low-income this be a year of diagnostic breakthroughs—in more and middle-income country (LMIC) health settings, ways than one. ■ The Lancet Global Health a highly accurate (sensitivity 84%, specificity 99%) Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open point-of-care diagnostic for urinary tract infections Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1214