Viewpoint News media as a commercial determinant of health Dan Even, Salma M Abdalla, Nason Maani, Sandro Galea Commercial determinants of health frameworks aim to identify the features and actions of corporate entities that can Lancet Glob Health 2024; influence health. This Viewpoint conceptualises the work of the news media as a set of commercial forces and 12: e1365–69 provides a framework that can help researchers better understand how features and actions of the news media shape Published Online health and health equity. We discuss four key features of news media action that can shape health: agenda setting, June 19, 2024 https://doi.org/10.1016/ framing, priming, and tactics of persuasion. Beyond the direct role of the media in shaping health, we also explore S2214-109X(24)00191-8 pathways (ie, public relation activities, advertising, and economic pressures) in which the media is used by other School of Public Health, Boston commercial actors to affect health. A better understanding of how news media operates can help inform efforts to University, Boston, MA, USA improve media actions to aid in improving population health outcomes. (D Even PhD, S M Abdalla PhD, S Galea MD DrPH); Moshe Introduction intelligence.3,5 Social media platforms can also be seen Prywes Center for Medical Education, Faculty of Health Several scholarly works from the past decade have helped through a CDOH lens, but there are particular Sciences, Ben-Gurion to organise thinking about how corporate actors shape considerations that pertain to social media, including University of the Negev, Beer- health. One definition articulates the commercial their engagement with advertising and reliance on Sheva, Israel (D Even); School of Social and Political Science, determinants of health (CDOH) as the “strategies and sophisticated algorithms,6 which could propagate University of Edinburgh, approaches used by the private sector to promote misinformation. However, examining traditional media Edinburgh, UK (N Maani PhD) products and choices that are detrimental to health”.1 could also aid in understanding social media as a CDOH, Correspondence to: This lens has been applied to a range of industries (eg, as both outlets share common attributes in reporting Dr Dan Even, Moshe Prywes tobacco, alcohol, food, and pharmaceutical industries2), news. Center for Medical Education, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben- helping health researchers identify approaches that can We argue here that a CDOH lens allows researchers to Gurion University of the Negev, be applied to improve how corporate practices shape better understand the mechanisms used by the traditional Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel health. news media that in turn have an effect on health. danev@post.bgu.ac.il Although ubiquitous in daily life, there has been Although the evidence of media influence on public relatively less consideration of how the media industry opinions regarding health-related issues is quite could influence health. The media sector operates as a extensive (eg, as shown by its role in improving condom means of communication, with the objective of use for HIV prevention and increasing flu vaccination disseminating information and stories to diverse and rates),7 we are not aware of previous discussions of the targeted audiences. News media encompasses printed, various functions of the news media and how they affect broadcasted, and online news formats and covers various health. Such discussion can help point to approaches domains, including local, national, global, economic, that can mitigate harm and promote benefits of media business, medicine, health, and more.3 coverage of health. For the purposes of this Viewpoint, the news media Throughout this Viewpoint, we consider pathways industry has two key components: traditional news common across the traditional media, while recognising media, including print and broadcast news media that different pathways might be more relevant to one or companies, groups, institutions, and conglomerates (and more of the media categories. We suggest four pathways online news websites that developed mostly from these),3 through which the news media influences public and social media, consisting of various applications perception, grounded in established theories or based on web technologies, offering the production, frameworks: agenda setting, framing, priming, and sharing, and exchange of content among users.4 tactics of persuasion. Examples of social media include Meta platforms (eg, Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, and WhatsApp), X Agenda setting (formerly Twitter), YouTube, and TikTok. Traditional and Agenda-setting theory, originally formulated in 1972 in new media differ in some characteristics—particularly in communication studies by McCombs and Shaw, posits the one-way communication model of traditional outlets, the media as a key source of public perception regarding as opposed to the two-way model of social media, which matters of public affairs. Agenda-setting theory explains allows for interaction and immediate feedback from how the media prioritises specific issues (eg, through audiences. placement or extent of coverage), thereby shaping the This Viewpoint examines news media as a CDOH. perception of importance of these issues among various Our discussion prioritises traditional media outlets to audiences.8 This theory can explain how diseases and facilitate a clear examination of the mentioned processes. public health processes are included or excluded from Traditional media outlets remain more popular than the public discourse. For example, Kelly and colleagues social media in terms of news consumption,5 even as found an increase in news coverage about the connection they struggle for visibility, and face growing mistrust, between the human papillomavirus (HPV) and cervical scepticism, and challenges in the era of artificial cancer in 2006 in major US newspapers and broadcast www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1365 Viewpoint networks, following approval of the first HPV vaccine aggressive behaviour among populations and have (the first vaccine to prevent cervical cancer) by the US implications on public and global health. Food and Drug Administration.9 Agenda setting thus represents an important lens Tactics of persuasion through which to understand the media’s influence on Tactics of persuasion used by the media can include health behaviour. For example, Fowler and colleagues various tools embedded in reporting that aim to persuade linked an increase in US television coverage of the consumers to accept the narratives expressed, including American Affordable Care Act during its initial quotations from professionals, mentioning of authorities, implementation in 2013 in specific geographical areas exemplifications, and supplying figures and images to and the likelihood of residents of those areas to favour support claims and enhance credibility. Collaborating the law.10 Young and colleagues showed how individuals with social influencers can also contribute to persuasion who were repeatedly exposed to media messages about efforts. the severity of infectious diseases considered these Persuasion can also be achieved through particular diseases to be more severe than other diseases that practices such as repetitive and consistent reporting. received less media attention.11 Tactics of persuasion have increased over the past two decades, following the increasing use of reciprocation Framing introduced in online traditional media platforms and Framing theory was first introduced by English further developed by social media to create interactions anthropologist Gregory Bateson in 1972, defining frames with consumers. These reciprocation features range as “a spatial and temporal bounding of a set of interactive from online comments to reporting and several features, messages” that operate as forms of communication.12 such as being able to like and share content.16 This concept is related to agenda setting, but expands the These tactics have been directly, if narrowly, examined focus of examination beyond any particular topic. in relation to their effect on health. For example, Kessler Framing as the deliberate presentation of specific themes and Bachmann showed how reading articles on online and claims from one standpoint rather than providing a news websites in Germany, accompanied by an image balanced narrative explains how the characterisation of that contradicts a widespread health myth, can affect an issue in news reports influences its perception by attitudes regarding the myth.17 The use of experts’ audiences. quotations in news articles can also be considered as a There are a range of examples showing how framing persuasive tactic to increase credibility. practices of the media could be considered a CDOH. Such framing processes can be considered in portraying How other commercial actors use the media to obesity in the media as an individual rather than a influence health societal issue, diminishing the importance of marketing The four pathways described previously are often used by unhealthy products, such as sugar-sweetened beverages, the news media to shape health, either via commercial as a catalyst. Degutis describes racial bias in the coverage media goals or as a mediated tool used by other of firearm violence in the news, connecting incidents commercial actors to distribute opinions, reach the involving men of colour to gangs and drugs and incidents public, and influence health. The media has also long involving White people to mental health.13 been an arena for commercial actors wishing to influence public opinion, although empirical scholarship Priming examining such effects on health is scarce. These actors Priming theory, originating from cognitive psychology, function as drivers of the media industry, incentivising suggests a temporary enhancement in the understanding media action that in turn enables these commercial of a concept that fades relatively swiftly. In contrast to the functions. This involvement of commercial actors within framing mechanism, which pertains to the presentation the media can also be considered a CDOH. We present of information, priming explains how exposure to three pathways through which other commercial actors repeated content published in the media, acting as a shape health through engagement with the news media: stimulus (ie, the prime), shapes perception, judgement, public relations, advertising, and economic pressures. and behaviour of consumers.14 The figure shows the associations discussed in this This pathway has been particularly illustrated in areas Viewpoint. concerned with political opinion but can also have implications for health. Studies showed how positive Public relations priming in the media can lead to a reduction in stigma Media reports functioning as a CDOH can be the result connected to diseases. For example, Oliver and colleagues of manifest or latent interests of other corporations’ showed the influence of positive priming in reducing public relations activities. Numerous examples in the stigmatisation towards obesity and eating behaviours in academic literature on CDOH examine the influence of the media.15 Likewise, exposure to violence in the media, companies manufacturing or distributing harmful encouraged by priming mechanisms, could increase products, such as tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, e1366 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 Viewpoint ultraprocessed foods, and sugar-sweetened beverages.16 The facilitation of public relations via the media is also Agenda-setting well established among pharmaceutical and health technology companies. The increasing reports on cervical Framing cancers in the media following the approval of the HPV Direct vaccine described previously could be part of the public Priming relations strategy from pharmaceutical companies.8 Activities around public relations of corporations Tactics of persuasion News media Health manifest in a range of strategies. The traditional method (ie, press releases) has long been used to influence Public relations companies’ preferred narrative about their actions. Indirect, via other commercial Sumner and colleagues showed how press releases can actors Advertising include exaggerations, which later end up in news media reports.18 However, press releases are not always considered Economic pressures a desirable public relations tool. For example, Lee and colleagues indicated that food companies’ press releases Figure: How news media influences health outcomes that are promotion related (rather than product related) might be received negatively, especially on social media.19 Lately these two pathways of commercial actors Corporations also use collaborations with sponsored (public relations strategies and advertising) have spokespersons, experts, and organisations, either merged, with undisclosed and covert sponsored content formally or informally, to represent their positions in in the media as the primary path of influence. This media reports, acting as a means of persuasion. For pathway, also named subliminal advertising, is funded example, tobacco companies influence media content by private corporations and often disguised as an through organisations such as Smokepeace in Sweden objective piece of reporting or as an editorial. The use of and Smokers’ Rights Club in Denmark.16 This approach hidden marketing content in the news media has been might also include media involvement of patient increasing in the past decade, given the economic organisations on reports about health care, which instability of media entities. Although this trend is yet improves the social and political influence of these to be studied in depth, preliminary investigation reports, and can be considered a public relations activity provides evidence for the use of secret sponsored given the pharmaceutical industry involvement in these materials on health-related products, with misleading organisations through fundings. effects. Supran and Oreskes described how ExxonMobil, The sometimes-hidden motivations of companies through advertisements presented in editorial-style are also relevant to health-specific news reporting. formats in leading newspapers, sought to shape public For example, it has been shown that in Ireland, alcohol discourse about climate change, with rhetoric similar to companies have encouraged messages in the media that that of the tobacco industry to emphasise doubt and are unsupportive of policies for alcohol warning labels.20 shift primary responsibility for product harms from Such approaches have the potential to be immensely itself onto customers.24 formative to public perception of particular products, Such merging and mixture of pathways is also with attendant consequences on population health. expressed in a recent study on the role of advertising manipulations in social media as a CDOH.6 Advertising Commercial actors also use the media to influence Economic pressures perception about their products through advertising. As Beyond the influence of advertising, some commercial early as in the 1980s, Jeffrey and colleagues described actors might also be involved in efforts to keep the role of television commercials in children’s eating discussions of damages to health out of public awareness habits,21 contributing to the overconsumption of so-called by inflicting economic pressures on media groups. News junk food and the obesity epidemic. In 2022, Septiono media platforms are facing increasing economic pressure and colleagues described the exposure of adolescents from commercial actors in various ways, be it through to tobacco advertisements on online platforms and the promise of advertising investments, threats of television in Indonesia.22 Studies show how exposure to economic sanctions, or competition from other media advertisements presented on various media platforms outlets for advertising revenues or subscriptions. As can influence public opinion on health-related issues. advertising revenues decline and audience fragmentation One classic example is the influence of marketing increases, these forces shape the transformation of breastmilk substitutes on breastfeeding practices. A business models of news media. Such pressures become decrease in breastfeeding has been associated with an more substantial given the consolidation of different increase in mortality in low-income countries due to the news media into fewer and more powerful media entities extensive promotion of baby formula.23 and possible future restrictions to the freedom of press. www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1367 Viewpoint An examination by Tomaz and colleagues of the these pressures can lead to a decline in media industry corporate structures of the media that were historically employment, which further reduces the media’s capacity designed to separate owners and advertisers from for comprehensive coverage of key issues. In addition, journalists showed a decay in the separation between economic pressures on the media through advertising newsroom, ownership, and sales departments. Although can be implemented by governmental agencies, as in some media outlets aim to reduce their reliance on Türkiye, causing media repression and fear.29 individual advertisers, the majority have become increasingly vulnerable to commercial interests. Conclusion Stagnation in spending on advertising and heightened The examples in this Viewpoint illustrate how the role of competition for attention have led to a decline in the the news media extends well beyond that of a neutral effectiveness of the advertising-based business model.25 conduit transmitting objective information to becoming The influence of advertisers on health news content in a CDOH itself, often driven by commercial incentives the media has been documented since the 1970s. For and strongly influenced by other commercial actors. This example, in 1976, after a series of articles on medical finding suggests that media actions can also harm or negligence, pharmaceutical companies issued a threat to improve health in direct and indirect ways. This withdraw their advertising from the Modern Medicine perspective could advance the discussion regarding the magazine owned by The New York Times, compelling The potential role of the media in promoting or discouraging New York Times to sell the magazine.26 healthy behaviours. With the increasing dependence of media outlets on Alongside our analysis, we should note that traditional advertising revenues, various examples of economic and social media platforms serve other functions for pressures within the industry on news media have consumers besides their defined goal of delivering emerged, harming the independence of news. For information. For example, these platforms can serve as example, in 2021 in Israel, a television channel was an entertainment tool and for some people they also criticised for inappropriately covering a government serve as a tool for health purposes, such as treating initiative to raise taxes on sweet drinks, while the channel’s depression.30 A wider discussion on these operations can board was controlled by shareholders in the Israeli branch expand our analysis on the media as a CDOH. of an international producer of soft drinks.27 Recognising how actions of the news media can It is also becoming increasingly common for influence health can guide health organisations and advertising companies to boycott as a means to advance regulators to encourage the development of approaches their own agendas or express dissent against opposing to mitigate health hazards, such as risk factors for viewpoints within media organisations. For example, in diseases and high-risk behaviours, and to incentivise the USA there was a documented advertiser boycott health-promoting activities. This understanding also against a show on Fox News due to comments made highlights the importance of integrating the fundamentals by its host regarding former President Barack Obama of media studies within public health education, with and the implementation of the Affordable Care Act the goal to train health professionals and medical initiative.28 professionals to better understand the importance of Economic pressures have several implications for the working with the media towards enhancing public and effective functioning of the news media. Alongside the global health. economic burdens newspapers have been dealing with, Contributors DE and SG conceptualised the Viewpoint, did the literature review, and developed the first draft. The commentary was later reviewed and Search strategy and selection criteria developed with input from SMA and NM. All authors contributed to subsequent drafts and approved the final manuscript. We searched EBSCOhost, PubMed, and Google Scholar from Declaration of interests Jan 25, 2023, to Sept 12, 2023 from database inception. We declare no competing interests. Additional searches in databases were done while revising the References manuscript from Feb 29, 2024, to March 7, 2024. This 1 Kickbusch I, Allen L, Franz C. The commercial determinants of literature review included English articles from the scientific health. Lancet Glob Health 2016; 4: e895–96. 2 Maani N, Pettlcrew M, Galea S. Commercial determinants of literature, comprising full-length papers and abstracts. It is health: an introduction. In: Maani N, Pettlcrew M, Galea S, eds. based on keywords derived from key concepts and Commercial determinants of health. New York, NY: Oxford meaningful topics discussed in the commentary: agenda- University Press, 2022: 3–6. 3 Fotopoulos S. Traditional media versus new media: between trust setting in media and healthcare; framing in media and and use. Eur View 2023; 22: 277–86. healthcare; priming in media and healthcare; persuasion 4 Tyson W. Pitch perfect: communicating with traditional and social techniques in media and healthcare; press releases and their media for scholars, researchers, and academic leaders. New York, NY: Routledge, 2010. health impacts or effects; advertising in newspapers and on 5 Newman N. Journalism, media, and technology trends and television and their health impacts; economic pressures in predictions 2024. Jan 9, 2024. https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac. media and health. uk/journalism-media-and-technology-trends-and-predictions-2024 (accessed March 4, 2024). e1368 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 Viewpoint 6 Rodrigues L, Newell R, Rathnaiah Babu G, Chatterjee T, 19 Lee H-HM, Van Dolen W, Kolk A. On the role of social media in the Sandhu NK, Gupta L. The social media infodemic of health-related ‘responsible’ food business: blogger buzz on health and obesity misinformation and technical solutions. Health Policy Technol 2024; issues. J Bus Ethics 2013; 118: 695–707. 13: 100846. 20 Vallance K, Vincent A, Schoueri-Mychasiw N, et al. News media and 7 Weinstein D, Jung K, Jauriqui V, Rosenthal EL, Van Valkenburgh S. the influence of the alcohol industry: an analysis of media coverage Media coverage of health issues and impact on audiences: analysis of alcohol warning labels with a cancer message in Canada and of the research landscape. Los Angeles, CA: USC Annenberg Ireland. J Stud Alcohol Drugs 2020; 81: 273–83. Norman Lear Center, 2020. 21 Jeffrey DB, McLellarn RW, Fox DT. The development of children’s 8 McCombs M. Reynolds A. News influence on our pictures of the eating habits: the role of television commercials. Health Educ Q world. In: Bryant J, Zillmann D, eds. Media effects: advances in 1982; 9: 174–89. theory and research. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 22 Septiono W, Kuipers MAG, Ng N, Kunst AE. Self-reported Publishers, 2002: 1–18. exposure of Indonesian adolescents to online and offline tobacco 9 Kelly BJ, Leader AE, Mittermaier DJ, Hornik RC, Cappella JN. advertising, promotion and sponsorship (TAPS). Tob Control 2022; The HPV vaccine and the media: how has the topic been covered 31: 98–105. and what are the effects on knowledge about the virus and cervical 23 Brady JP. Marketing breast milk substitutes: problems and perils cancer? Patient Educ Couns 2009; 77: 308–13. throughout the world. Arch Dis Child 2012; 97: 529–32. 10 Fowler EF, Baum LM, Barry CL, Niederdeppe J, Gollust SE. 24 Supran G, Oreskes N. Rhetoric and frame analysis of ExxonMobil’s Media messages and perceptions of the Affordable Care Act during climate change communications. One Earth 2021; 4: 696–719. the early phase of implementation. J Health Polit Policy Law 2017; 25 Tomaz T, Fidalgo J, Grönvall J, Trappel J. Commercial influence in 42: 167–95. newsrooms: comparing strategies to resist pressure from owners 11 Young ME, Norman GR, Humphreys KR. Medicine in the popular and advertisers. In: Trappel J, Tomaz T, eds. Success and failure in press: the influence of the media on perceptions of disease. news media performance: comparative analysis in the Media for PLoS One 2018; 3: e3552. Democracy Monitor 2021. 2022; 165–186. Gothenburg: Nordicom, 12 Bateson G. Steps to an ecology of mind: collected essays in 165–186. anthropology, psychiatry, evolution and epistemology. Northvale, NJ: 26 Bagdikian BH. The media monopoly, 2nd edn. Boston, MA: Beacon Jason Aronson INC, 1972. Press, 1987. 13 Degutis LC. Communication, terminology, and the role of the media. 27 Perisco O. In the service of the landlords, News 12 declared war on In: Degutis LC, Spivak HR, eds. Gun violence prevention, a public the tax on sugary drinks. Aug 4, 2021. https://www.the7eye.org. health approach. Washington, DC: APHA Press, 2021: 109–16. il/425253 (accessed Oct 20, 2023). 14 Ewoldsen D, Roskos B, Carpentier F. Media priming: a synthesis. 28 Edgecliffe-Johnson A. Advertisers desert TV show after Obama In: Bryant J, Zillman D, eds. Media effects: advances in theory and label. Financial Times. Aug 14, 2019. https://www.ft.com/ research. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, content/06fa8e3a-885f-11de-82e4-00144feabdc0 (accessed 2002: 97–120. Oct 20, 2023). 15 Oliver MD, Datta S, Baldwin DR. A sympathetic nervous system 29 Akser M, Baybars B. Repressed media and illiberal politics in evaluation of obesity stigma. PLoS One 2017; 12: e0185703. Turkey: the persistence of fear. Southeast Eur Black Sea Stud 2023; 16 Hilton S. The influence of commercial industries on public discourse. 23: 159–77. In: Maani N, Pettlcrew M, Galea S, eds. Commercial determinants of 30 Obiechina CK. The mental health benefit of social media: the use of health. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2022: 274–82. social media skits for depression treatment among women in 17 Kessler SH, Bachmann E. Debunking health myths on the internet: Nigeria. Ianna J Interdiscip Stud 2023; 5: 1–10. the persuasive effect of (visual) online communication. J Public Health 2022; 30: 1823–35. Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an 18 Sumner P, Vivian-Griffiths S, Boivin J, et al. Exaggerations and Open Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. caveats in press releases and health-related science news. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0168217. www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1369