Comment Over-the-counter sales of antibiotics: a call to action to ensure access and prevent excess Over-the-counter (OTC) sale of antibiotics refers to the prescription and sales of antibiotics for human use. The practice of selling antibiotics without a valid prescription prevalence of OTC antibiotics varies considerably, even from a health-care professional authorised to issue within the same country, and between urban and rural it. OTC sales are a global concern, as acknowledged areas, though its prevalence is higher in low-income and in the global action plan on antimicrobial resistance,1 middle-income country settings.9 the report of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group on There were several key findings from the WHO global antimicrobial resistance,2 and the recently launched consultation to phase out OTC antibiotics.7 Access to people-centred approach to addressing antimicrobial free, high-quality primary health care, the availability resistance in human health.3 of universal health coverage, and a trusted public Typically, antibiotics are prescription-only medications health system are critical aspects across all countries because their misuse or overuse can contribute influencing patients’ health-care-seeking behaviour. to the spread of antimicrobial resistance and they Inefficiencies in the public health-care system, time, have potential for drug interactions and serious and convenience in accessing pharmacies or other drug adverse effects. However, in some countries, certain sellers all contribute substantially to the prevalence antibiotics are still available OTC for specific conditions. of self-medication. A substantial portion of sales Additionally, the availability of antibiotics without a of antibiotics in low-income and middle-income prescription can vary by country and region, with a countries still occurs in the private health sector, where generally higher prevalence documented in low-income there is variable oversight.7 Additionally, unregistered and middle-income countries.4 Although countries pharmacies and informal drug sellers operate beyond have established various measures to control the sale the reach of regulatory authorities, yet serve as the of antibiotics, the main challenge is enforcement. On primary and, in some cases, the sole point of access the demand side, self-diagnosis and self-medication to health care for poor and disadvantaged groups, are driven by lack of knowledge on appropriate use particularly in contexts with poor access to health of antibiotics and lack of access to health care.5 The services.10 availability of OTC antibiotics is a global concern as it Balancing access to antibiotics for those in need can lead to inappropriate use, incomplete treatment, and curbing excessive use is crucial and requires a and antimicrobial resistance. comprehensive approach that is at the base of well- In May, 2023, the Quadripartite Organizations (the UN functioning health-care systems. In low-income Food and Agriculture Organization, the UN Environment and middle-income country settings, lack of access Programme, WHO, and the World Organisation for to appropriate antibiotics is a significant driver for Animal Health) convened the first Global Joint Summit mortality in infectious diseases. Therefore, completely of Human and Veterinary Medicines Regulatory stopping all OTC sales, without robust health systems in Authorities to Preserve Antimicrobials.6 One of its place which can ensure effective treatment for infectious objectives was to foster innovative, smart solutions diseases for all, can be problematic. In many low-income to reduce OTC sales of antibiotics. Concurrently, WHO and middle-come countries, community health- launched an electronic consultation and later convened care workers play a crucial role in appropriate use of a consultation of key stakeholders to discuss possible antibiotics, or in some cases are the sole point of access interventions including the feasibility of a global to health-care information or treatment for infectious campaign to phase out OTC sales of antibiotics.7 diseases, especially where health-care infrastructures are Furthermore, the Global Database for Tracking poor.7 Antimicrobial Resistance Country Self-Assessment Due to the visibility of the issue and the interest Survey8 reported that, out of 177 surveyed countries, from many key stakeholders, there is a strong need 160 declared that they have regulations or laws on for country-level action to reduce OTC antibiotic use. www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1227 Comment Notably, interventions should be multifaceted and We declare no competing interests. complementary. There is no single right solution to Copyright © 2024 World Health Organization. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is the issue and the approach would likely need to be an Open Access article published under the CC BY 3.0 IGO license which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the multidisciplinary and iterated depending on country and original work is properly cited. In any use of this article, there should be no regional contexts and should ensure sustainable access to suggestion that WHO endorses any specific organisation, products or services. The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. This notice should be preserved along antibiotics. with the article’s original URL. Several interventions have been implemented globally *Mimi (Meheret) Melles-Brewer, Francesca Chiara, to reduce OTC antibiotic sales. Some interventions have Diriba Mosissa, Philip Mathew targeted the supply of antibiotics or the strengthening mellesm@who.int and enforcement of regulations, to increase inspection World Health Organization, Geneva 1211, Switzerland capacity as well as regulations for pharmacies and drug 1 WHO. Global action plan on antimicrobial resistance. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2016. sellers’ licensing. Others have focused on reducing 2 WHO. No time to wait: securing the future from drug-resistant infections. inappropriate demand which generally require long- Report to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2019. term and sustained behaviour change interventions 3 WHO. People-centred approach to addressing antimicrobial resistance in human health. WHO core package of interventions to support national through community engagement. However, more action plans. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2023. operational and implementation research is required to 4 Do NTT, Vu HTL, Nguyen CTK, et al. Community-based antibiotic access and use in six low-income and middle-income countries: a mixed-method better understand the impact of such interventions in approach. Lancet Glob Health 2021; 9: e610–19. different settings. 5 WHO. Antimicrobial resistance factsheet. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2023. Acknowledging the varying systemic factors between 6 WHO. 1st Global Joint Summit of Human and Veterinary Medicines countries, including health-care delivery capacity and Regulatory Authorities to Preserve Antimicrobials. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2023. https://www.who.int/news-room/events/ antibiotic access, a decision was made to not move detail/2023/05/04/default-calendar/human-and-veterinary-medicines- regulatory-authorities-summit (accessed March 21, 2024). forward with a WHO global campaign at this stage. 7 WHO. Global campaign to phase out over-the-counter-sales of antibiotics: The UN General Assembly High-Level Meeting on meeting report. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2024. 8 WHO. Tracking AMR Country Self-Assessment Survey - TrACSS 7.0 2023. antimicrobial resistance in September, 2024, poses a Geneva: World Health Organization, 2023. https://www.who.int/ timely opportunity to mobilise political commitments publications/m/item/tracking-amr-country-self-assessment-survey- tracss-(7.0)-2023 (accessed March 21, 2024). and financial resources for such an issue that is severely 9 Li J, Zhou P, Wang J, et al. Worldwide dispensing of non-prescription underfunded. WHO will nevertheless continue to antibiotics in community pharmacies and associated factors: a mixed- methods systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis 2023; 23: e361–70. encourage and collaborate with countries to prioritise 10 Dagrou A, Chimhutu V. I buy medicines from the streets because I am poor: the issue in respective national action plans on a qualitative account on why the informal market for medicines thrive in Ivory Coast. Inquiry 2022; 59: 469580221086585. antimicrobial resistance. e1228 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024