Regular physical activity and exercise are important for healthy aging and are beneficial for chronic disease man- agement. Exercise prescriptions for older adults should account for the individual’s health status and functional capacity. Any amount of exercise is better than being sedentary, even if health status prevents a person from achieving recommended goals. For most health outcomes, more benefits occur with physical activity performed at higher intensity, greater frequency, or longer duration. Guidelines recommend at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity or 75 min- utes of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity and at least two days of muscle-strengthening activities per week. Key components of the prescription include setting achievable activity goals, identifying barriers and providing potential solutions, and providing specific recommendations on the type, frequency, and intensity of activi- ties. Older adults will derive distinct benefits from aerobic exercise, strength or resistance training, flexibility or stretching exercises, and balance training. Many community resources are available to help older adults begin a more active lifestyle. (Am Fam Physician. 2017;95(7):425-432. Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Fam- ily Physicians.) April 1, 2017 ◆ Volume 95, Number 7 www.aafp.org/afp American Family Physician 425 AIHPLED ENIREHTAC YB NOITARTSULLI Exercise Prescriptions in Older Adults PEARL GUOZHU LEE, MD, MS; ELIZABETH A. JACKSON, MD, MPH; and CAROLINE R. RICHARDSON, MD University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan T CME This clinical content he benefits of regular physical prevention in adults with CVD risk factors.4 conforms to AAFP criteria activity and exercise on general This article reviews the recent evidence sup- for continuing medical health and overall quality of life porting physical activity among older adults, education (CME). See in older adults are well estab- and aims to help physicians effectively coun- CME Quiz Questions on page 417. lished,1 and these benefits are particularly sel older patients to increase physical activity. salient among patients with chronic medi- Author disclosure: No rel- evant financial affiliations. cal conditions such as osteoarthritis or Important Considerations in Older cardiovascular disease (CVD).2 However, Adults in 2013, more than 33% of adults 65 years Older adults are heterogeneous with respect or older reported no leisure-time physical to their health status and physical function.5 activities.1 Only 16% of older adults met Normal aging is associated with reduced national guideline recommendations for functional capacity and strength, and degen- physical activity, which are at least 150 min- erative musculoskeletal conditions. Older utes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity adults at any submaximal exercise load tend or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic to exert at a higher percentage of their maxi- activity and two or more days of muscle- mal capacity and effort than younger per- strengthening activities per week.1 Barriers sons.6 Additionally, older adults are more to exercise include a lack of knowledge, lack likely than younger adults to engage in phys- of motivation, and poor health.2 ical activities at lower intensities.7 Although Many primary care physicians agree that many older adults are functionally indepen- counseling to promote physical activity and dent and able to participate in most exercise a healthy diet is important to their patients.3 programs, others may have multiple chronic The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force diseases and geriatric conditions, such as recommends that primary care physicians cognitive impairment and recurrent falls, provide behavioral counseling to promote a limiting their ability to participate in certain healthful diet and physical activity for CVD types of exercise.5 ▲ Patient information: A handout on this topic, written by the authors of this article, is available at http://www.aafp.org/ afp/2017/0401/p425-s1. html. Downloaded from the American Family Physician website at www.aafp.org/afp. Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Family Physicians. For the private, noncom- mercial use of one individual user of the website. All other rights reserved. Contact copyrights@aafp.org for copyright questions and/or permission requests. Exercise in Older Adults SORT: KEY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRACTICE Evidence Clinical recommendation rating References For older adults, any physical activity is better than being sedentary. Reducing sedentary B 10, 11, 14, 16, 24 time has cardiovascular, metabolic, and functional benefits. Resistance training preserves muscle strength and physical functioning in older adults. A 21, 22 To promote and maintain health, older adults should aim for at least 150 minutes of B 21, 24, 30 moderate-intensity aerobic activity and two or more days of resistance training per week. Flexibility exercises improve and maintain joint range of movement in older adults. C 24 Balance exercises (e.g., tai chi, yoga) can improve or maintain physical function and A 20, 25 reduce falls in older adults at risk of falling. Physical activity decreases the risk of chronic diseases and enhances treatment. B 14, 16, 24, 38 A = consistent, good-quality patient-oriented evidence; B = inconsistent or limited-quality patient-oriented evidence; C = consensus, disease-oriented evidence, usual practice, expert opinion, or case series. For information about the SORT evidence rating system, go to http://www.aafp.org/afpsort. Sedentary Behavior vs. Physical Activity recommendation for physical activity should Sedentary time increases with older age,8 include a specific activity (modality), its fre- and excessive time spent in sedentary behav- quency and intensity, and short- and long- ior, such as sitting, is associated with delete- term goals to help maintain motivation.15 rious health outcomes including abnormal Common terms in an exercise prescription glucose metabolism and increased mortal- and examples of different types of physical ity.9 Reducing sedentary time, independent activities are described in Table 1.16,17 Rec- of physical activity, has known cardiovas- ommendations by the American College of cular, metabolic, and functional benefits in Sports Medicine (ACSM) and U.S. Depart- older adults.10,11 One study found that among ment of Health and Human Services (HHS) men 71 years or older whose physical activ- are listed in Table 2.13,16 ity exceeded current guidelines, more time Physical activity prescriptions can first tar- spent in sedentary behavior was associated get increasing activity time, reducing seden- with greater mortality risk.12 Any amount of tary time, or both, and then later increasing exercise is better than being sedentary, even the intensity of the activity.18 In the beginning, if the individual’s health status prevents the the intensity and duration of physical activity achievement of recommended goals. should be low for older adults who are decon- ditioned or have physical function limita- Key Components of an Exercise tions, and then increased slowly as tolerated.16 Prescription For frail individuals, muscle strengthening For most health outcomes, benefits increase activities and balance training may need to as the amount of physical activity increases precede aerobic training activities. through higher intensity, greater frequency, or longer duration.13,14 A verbal or written GOAL SETTING The initial adoption of physical activity is best predicted by readiness to change.19 BEST PRACTICES IN GERIATRIC MEDICINE: RECOMMENDATIONS Before writing an exercise prescription, phy- FROM THE CHOOSING WISELY CAMPAIGN sicians should educate the patient about the benefits of physical activity and motivate him Recommendation Sponsoring organization or her with relevant personal goals,2 such Do not prescribe underdosed strength training American Physical as improving physical function or fitness, programs for older adults. Instead, match the Therapy Association weight management, improving chronic frequency, intensity, and duration of exercise disease management, and preventing falls.20 to the individual’s abilities and goals. Once the patient is ready to start a physical Source: For more information on the Choosing Wisely Campaign, see http://www. activity program, the physician should help choosingwisely.org. For supporting citations and to search Choosing Wisely rec- the patient set achievable goals (e.g., aim to ommendations relevant to primary care, see http://www.aafp.org/afp/recommend increase brisk walking by 50 minutes a week ations/search.htm. rather than running three miles a day). 426 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp Volume 95, Number 7 ◆ April 1, 2017 Exercise in Older Adults Physicians should instruct the patient program). The four main categories of to begin with activities that he or she can physical activities are aerobic/endurance, actually perform. The content and goals of resistance/strength, balance, and flexibility the prescription need to be tailored indi- exercises (Table 1).16,17 vidually to accommodate health status and Older adults who are not familiar with functional capacity.5 The activities may be exercise training may benefit from work- unstructured, such as activities of daily liv- ing with an experienced fitness trainer. A ing (e.g., climbing stairs, walking to do an trainer who has experience working with errand), or exercise programs, which are older adults and is certified by an accredited planned, structured, and repetitive move- organization such as the ACSM can edu- ments to improve or maintain physical cate patients on the benefits of exercise, as fitness (e.g., aerobics class, weight-lifting well as the optimal frequency, intensity, and Table 1. Common Terms in an Exercise Prescription and Examples of Physical Activities Term Definition Exercise Planned, structured, and repetitive movement to improve or maintain one or more components of physical fitness Intensity Absolute intensity is the amount of energy used by the body per minute of activity, objectively measured as a metabolic equivalent, or MET; 1 MET = the amount of energy used in a resting state, like sitting or sleeping Relative intensity is the level of effort required to do an activity, as rated by the individual doing the activity; on a 10-point scale, sitting = 0 and working as hard as possible = 10 Light intensity (e.g., casual walking, light < 3 METs housework, stretching) Moderate intensity (e.g., brisk walking, 3 to 5.9 METs, or the individual will breathe harder with a faster heart beat; the water aerobics, ballroom dancing, individual should be able to talk but not sing; on a 10-point scale, a moderate- gardening) intensity activity would be rated as 5 to 6 Vigorous intensity (e.g., jogging or running, ≥ 6 METs, or the individual will not be able to say more than a few words without aerobic dancing, heavy gardening) pausing for a breath Physical activity Body movement that is produced by the contraction of skeletal muscles and that increases energy expenditure Aerobic/endurance exercise (e.g., walking, Exercise in which the body’s large muscles move in a rhythmic manner for stationary cycling, aquatic exercise) sustained periods Balance training (e.g., backward, sideways, A combination of activities designed to increase the individual’s lower body heel, or toe walking; tai chi) strength and reduce the likelihood of falling Flexibility exercise (e.g., stretching Activities designed to preserve or extend range of motion around a joint hamstring, calves, or triceps) Resistance/strength exercise (e.g., exercises Exercise that causes muscles to work or hold against an applied force or weight using resistance bands, weight machines, handheld weights; digging, lifting, and carrying as part of gardening; carrying groceries) Physical function The capacity to carry out the physical activities of daily living; physical function reflects motor function and control, physical fitness, and habitual physical activity Sedentary behavior Activity that involves little or no movement or activities that are considered posture (e.g., sitting), having an energy expenditure of ≤ 1.5 METs17 Information from references 16 and 17. April 1, 2017 ◆ Volume 95, Number 7 www.aafp.org/afp American Family Physician 427 Exercise in Older Adults duration of each type of exercise. A trainer adults,15 and resistance exercise training is the can also help decrease the fear of injury from only therapy known to consistently improve exercise.15 For patients with physical func- muscle mass, strength, power, and quality, tion limitations, such as gait impairment, as well as overall physical function in older physical therapy may help to restore physical adults.21,22 Aging is associated with a decline function to prepare for exercise. Table 3 dem- in muscle strength and muscle power, which onstrates the key components of the exercise is a combination of force and speed. These prescription. changes can be described by muscle qual- ity, measured as the force produced per unit AEROBIC AND RESISTANCE EXERCISE of active muscle mass, which estimates the Aerobic exercises have numerous cardiovas- contribution from muscle mass, neuromus- cular and musculoskeletal benefits for older cular function, and mechanical, contractile, and architectural properties of muscle.23 The ACSM recommends that older adults perform Table 2. Recommendations for Physical Activity in Older the following each week: a minimum of 150 Adults minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activ- ity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aero- Avoid inactivity. Some physical activity is better than none. bic activity, and two or more nonconsecutive The intensity and duration of physical activity should be low at the outset days of moderate-intensity strengthening for older adults who are highly deconditioned, functionally limited, or activities, with eight to 10 exercises involving have chronic conditions that affect their ability to perform physical tasks. the major muscle groups and eight to 12 rep- The progression of activities should be individualized and tailored to the etitions of each exercise.16 This recommenda- individual’s tolerance and preferences. tion is consistent with the 2008 HHS Physical Muscle strengthening activities and balance training may need to precede Activity Guidelines for Americans.13 aerobic training activities among very frail individuals.13 Older adults should exceed the recommended minimum amounts of FLEXIBILITY OR STRETCHING EXERCISES physical activity if they desire to improve their fitness. Minimum weekly activity to achieve important health benefits: Older adults with reduced joint flexibility Two hours and 30 minutes (150 minutes) of moderate-intensity* aerobic may have difficulty performing daily activi- activity (e.g., brisk walking), plus muscle-strengthening activities for at ties such as dressing and reaching objects least two days on a shelf. Flexibility or stretching exercises or improve joint range of motion after three to One hour and 15 minutes (75 minutes) of vigorous-intensity† aerobic four weeks of regular stretching at two to activity (e.g., jogging, running), plus muscle-strengthening activities for three times per week, but even greater gains at least two days are achieved with daily flexibility exercises.24 or Flexibility exercise is most effective when A combination of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activities performed after light-to-moderate aerobic equivalent to the recommendations above, plus muscle-strengthening activities for at least two days or resistance exercise. Patients with recent Flexibility exercises (static movements) should be performed at least joint injuries or surgery should consult with two days per week at moderate intensity, preferably after aerobic or their physicians before performing flexibil- resistance exercises.16 ity exercises to avoid worsening injuries or Older adults at risk of falling should do balance training16 for three or more impairing the healing of surgical wounds. days per week.13 BALANCE AND PROPRIOCEPTIVE TRAINING NOTE: The American College of Sports Medicine guidelines were developed by an expert panel after evaluating the strength of available scientific evidence based on Balance and proprioceptive training should the rating system from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (A through D).16 be a regular part of exercise for all older *—Moderate-intensity activity requires a medium level of effort. On a scale of 0 to 10, adults to prevent falls, especially in individ- where sitting is 0 and the greatest effort possible is 10, moderate-intensity activity is a uals at higher fall risk.16,20 Balance training 5 or 6 and produces noticeable increases in respiratory and heart rates. involves practicing to control movements †—Vigorous-intensity activity is a 7 or 8 on a scale of 0 to 10 and produces large increases in respiratory and heart rates. of the body’s position while standing, but Information from references 13 and 16. with reducing base of support (e.g., standing on one foot).16 Balance training should be 428 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp Volume 95, Number 7 ◆ April 1, 2017 Exercise in Older Adults practiced at least two hours per week, should DIABETES MELLITUS be ongoing for lasting fall prevention effect, Regular physical activity as part of a life- and may be group based or home based.25 To style intervention can help prevent diabe- minimize the risk of falling during exercise, tes mellitus38; reduce physical functioning balance training should be closely super- impairment among older patients with dia- vised at first and begin with less challenging betes39; improve glucose levels, lipid levels, postures. and blood pressure control; and enhance weight loss.30 Physical activity programs Monitoring Progress that include aerobic and resistance training After the patient begins a physical activity have demonstrated improvement in A1C lev- program, the physician should continue to els more than aerobic or resistance training monitor the progress periodically (e.g., at alone.30,40 The ACSM and the American least once per year), provide encouragement, Diabetes Association recommend that pre- and help the patient overcome barriers such viously sedentary individuals with diabetes as lack of time or fatigue. Pedometer use has who want to undertake activity more intense been shown to significantly increase physi- than brisk walking and individuals who cal activity if a step goal is set.26 The goal can be incremental increases of daily steps from baseline (e.g., by 10% every two weeks),26 or Table 3. Sample Exercise Prescription increases of daily walking time (e.g., by 10 minutes per day) until a step goal is reached.13 Weeks 1 and 2* Aerobic activities Older Adults with Chronic Medical For 3 days per week (frequency), walk briskly (activity, intensity) for Conditions 20 minutes (duration) each day at the local park after dinner (setting). Older adults with chronic medical con- Flexibility training ditions can benefit from participating in For 3 days per week (frequency), stretch calf and thigh muscles (activity, regular physical activities (Table 4).16,21,27-35 muscle groups) for 5 minutes each day at home (setting) after walking Despite the concern for the risk of exercise- (aerobic activity). related cardiovascular events, stress testing is Resistance training unnecessary for older adults who plan to par- For 2 days per week (frequency), lift 5-lb dumbbells, front arm and side arm raises (activity, muscle groups) for 2 sets of 5 repetitions each day ticipate in low- or moderate-intensity physi- at home (setting). cal activities. Stress testing is recommended Weeks 3 and 4 (increase duration of aerobic activity and add more before vigorous exercise training in persons resistance training) with known CVD.16 Physical activity may be Aerobic activities contraindicated or restricted in a few medical For 3 days per week (frequency), walk briskly (activity, intensity) for conditions (e.g., decompensated congestive 30 minutes (duration) each day at the local park after dinner (setting). heart failure, severe aortic stenosis).36 Flexibility training For 3 days per week (frequency), stretch calf and thigh muscles (activity, OSTEOARTHRITIS muscle groups) for 5 minutes each day at home (setting) after walking Land- and aquatic-based physical activities (aerobic activity). help patients with knee or hip osteoarthritis Resistance training to reduce pain and increase mobility, muscle For 2 days per week (frequency), lift 5-lb dumbbells, front arm and side arm raises, and perform wall push-ups (activity, muscle groups) for 2 strength, joint flexibility, and aerobic endur- sets of 10 repetitions each day at home (setting). ance.28,29 The buoyancy of the water decreases joint loading, which can help decrease pain, NOTE: Sample exercise prescription for an older adult with diabetes mellitus treated and warm water may have a therapeutic with glipizide (Glucotrol) who currently performs less than 150 minutes of moderate- effect. Once patients become more mobile, intensity physical activity per week. Frequency, activity, muscle group, and setting should be tailored to the individual patient. they can transition to land-based exercises.29 *—Caution to the patient: Keep some food readily available in case your blood sugar Land-based exercise improves pain and func- gets low. Try to exercise within two hours of eating a meal. Take breaks during activi- tional aerobic capacity more than aquatic ties if necessary. activities.37 April 1, 2017 ◆ Volume 95, Number 7 www.aafp.org/afp American Family Physician 429 Exercise in Older Adults have cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy Table 4. Physical Activity Recommendations for Patients undergo exercise stress testing before start- with Specific Medical Conditions ing an exercise program.30 OBESITY Arthritis/musculoskeletal pain21,27 Evidence supports land- or aquatic-based physical activity 28,29 Weight loss, particularly unintentional, in Aerobic training three to five times per week and resistance training two older adults may lead to a loss of lean muscle to three times per week and bone mineral density (BMD), which Aerobic exercises (e.g., walking or cycling), lower extremity strengthening may lead to impaired physical function and exercises, tai chi, and aquatic exercises (e.g., aerobics, strength training disability. Exercise during an active weight- performed in a therapeutic/heated indoor pool) can all alleviate pain and loss period can attenuate the loss of BMD improve function in patients with osteoarthritis27 and lean body mass.32 A study found that Cardiovascular disease (includes peripheral vascular occlusive combining 5% to 7% (intentional) weight disease) loss with regular physical activities, such For peripheral vascular occlusive disease, patients may need to exercise to as lifestyle activities or resistance training, the limits of pain tolerance each session to extend time to claudication resulted in improved mobility and lower Stress testing is recommended before vigorous exercise training in persons extremity physical performance in over- with known cardiovascular disease16 weight or obese older adults.41 Diabetes mellitus30 Aerobic training at least three days per week with no more than two OSTEOPOROSIS consecutive days between bouts of activity (i.e., 150 minutes per week of moderate to vigorous activities) Resistance exercises are effective for improv- and ing BMD in women and men. In a systematic Resistance training at moderate to vigorous intensity at least twice per review focusing on middle-aged and older week on nonconsecutive days30 men, resistance training alone or in com- If the individual is using insulin or insulin secretagogues, decrease the bination with impact-loading activities was medication doses before, during, and after exercise, and/or ingest associated with more BMD improvement carbohydrates if preexercise blood glucose levels are less than 100 mg than walking.33 Individuals who already per dL (5.6 mmol per L) have osteoporosis and individuals with pre- Falls vious vertebral fractures are at risk of further For patients at risk of falls, balance exercises are recommended for fall vertebral fractures. It may be beneficial to prevention16 consult with physical medicine and rehabili- Additional effective fall prevention programs are multifaceted tation physicians on physical activities that interventions that include gait training and strength training, tai chi, will minimize this risk. Otago Exercise Program, and Stepping On31 Obesity COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT Aerobic exercises contribute to energy expenditure to induce caloric deficit Exercise training appears to improve cog- Resistance exercises are recommended during weight-loss period to help nition or lower the risk of dementia. In a maintain lean muscle and bone mineral density 32 randomized trial, older adults with mild cog- Osteoporosis33,34 nitive impairment who added 142 minutes of Most evidence supports resistance exercises; some evidence supports exercise per week on average had modestly high-intensity and high-impact aerobic exercises improved cognition compared with those Add balance training to prevent falls who did not exercise.42 Exercise may also Pulmonary disease35 improve the ability to perform activities of Exercise training is a part of the pulmonary rehabilitation program (usually daily living in persons with dementia and six to 12 weeks) for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease consequently reduce caregiver burden.43 Exercise sessions should be timed to coincide with bronchodilator Exercise intervention among patients with medication peak; use oxygen during exercise as needed cognitive impairment should involve care- givers or be supervised by fitness trainers NOTE: A combination of aerobic and resistance training at moderate intensity is usually recommended for optimal health benefits. to ensure safety. Table 5 provides additional Information from references 16, 21, and 27 through 35. resources on physical activity for clinicians and patients. 430 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp Volume 95, Number 7 ◆ April 1, 2017 Exercise in Older Adults Table 5. Physical Activity Resources for Clinicians and Patients Sponsoring organization and resource Website Centers for Disease Control and Prevention How Much Physical Activity Do Older Adults Need? http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/basics/older_adults/index.htm Preventing Falls: A Guide to Implementing Effective http://www.cdc.gov/homeandrecreationalsafety/pdf/falls/fallprevention Community-Based Fall Prevention Programs guide-2015-a.pdf National Institute on Aging Exercise & Physical Activity: Introduction https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/publication/exercise-physical-activity/ introduction Go4Life http://www.nia.nih.gov/Go4Life National Institutes of Health Health Information https://www.nih.gov/health-information NIH Senior Health—Exercise: How to Get Started http://nihseniorhealth.gov/exerciseandphysicalactivityhowtogetstarted/ choosingy ouractivities/01.html National Library of Medicine’s Medline Plus Exercise for Seniors https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/exerciseforseniors.html This article updates previous articles on this topic by clinical setting: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med. Elsawy and Higgins,44 McDermott and Mernitz,45 and 2012; 46(9): 625-631. Nied and Franklin.46 4. LeFevre ML. Behavioral counseling to promote a health- ful diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease Data Sources: PubMed, Cochrane Review, and Essential prevention in adults with cardiovascular risk factors: Evidence Plus are the primary sources for the article. Key- U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation words include walking, older age, exercise, physical activ- statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 161(8): 587-593. ity, exercise prescription, falls, osteoporosis, diabetes, 5. Lee PG, Cigolle CT, Ha J, et al. Physical function limita- osteoarthritis, dementia, and depression. Search dates: tions among middle-aged and older adults with predia- September 17, 2015, to September 16, 2016. betes: one exercise prescription may not fit all. Diabetes Care. 2013; 36(10):3 076-3083. 6. Masoro EJ. Handbook of Physiology: A Critical, Compre- The Authors hensive Presentation of Physiological Knowledge and PEARL GUOZHU LEE, MD, MS, is an assistant professor in Concepts. Section 11: Aging. Bethesda, Md.: American Physiological Society; 1995. the Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Geriat- ric and Palliative Medicine, at the University of Michigan 7. Evenson KR, Buchner DM, Morland KB. Objective mea- School of Medicine in Ann Arbor. surement of physical activity and sedentary behavior among US adults aged 60 years or older. Prev Chronic ELIZABETH A. JACKSON, MD, MPH, is an associate pro- Dis. 2012; 9: E26. fessor in the Department of Internal Medicine, Division 8. Matthews CE, Chen KY, Freedson PS, et al. Amount of of Cardiovascular Medicine, at the University of Michigan time spent in sedentary behaviors in the United States, School of Medicine. 2003-2004. Am J Epidemiol. 2008; 167(7): 875-881. 9. Katzmarzyk PT, Church TS, Craig CL, Bouchard C. Sit- CAROLINE R. RICHARDSON, MD, is a professor and asso- ting time and mortality from all causes, cardiovascular ciate chair for research programs in the Department of disease, and cancer. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009; 41(5): Family Medicine at the University of Michigan School of 998-1005. Medicine. 10. Bankoski A, Harris TB, McClain JJ, et al. Sedentary activ- Address correspondence to Pearl Guozhu Lee, MD, MS, ity associated with metabolic syndrome independent of physical activity. Diabetes Care. 2011; 34(2):4 97-503. University of Michigan School of Medicine, 2215 Fuller Rd., 11G, Ann Arbor, MI (e-mail: pearllee@med.umich. 11. Elosua R, Bartali B, Ordovas JM, Corsi AM, Lauretani edu). Reprints are not available from the authors. F, Ferrucci L; InCHIANTI Investigators. Association between physical activity, physical performance, and inflammatory biomarkers in an elderly population: the REFERENCES InCHIANTI study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2005; 60(6):7 60-767. 1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 12. Ensrud KE, Blackwell TL, Cauley JA, et al.; Osteoporotic Nutrition, physical activity and obesity data, trends and Fractures in Men Study Group. Objective measures of maps. https://nccd.cdc.gov/NPAO_DTM/. Accessed activity level and mortality in older men. J Am Geriatr February 3, 2017. Soc. 2014; 62(11): 2079-2087. 2. Costello E, Kafchinski M, Vrazel J, Sullivan P. Motivators, 13. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 barriers, and beliefs regarding physical activity in an older Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. Office of adult population. J Geriatr Phys Ther. 2011; 34(3):1 38-147. Disease and Prevention and Health Promotion. Wash- 3. Hébert ET, Caughy MO, Shuval K. Primary care provid- ington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser- ers’ perceptions of physical activity counselling in a vices; 2008. April 1, 2017 ◆ Volume 95, Number 7 www.aafp.org/afp American Family Physician 431 Exercise in Older Adults 14. Warburton DE, Nicol CW, Bredin SS. Health benefits 30. Colberg SR, Albright AL, Blissmer BJ, et al. Exercise and of physical activity: the evidence. CMAJ. 2006; 174(6): type 2 diabetes: American College of Sports Medicine 801-809. and the American Diabetes Association: joint position 15. Dauenhauer JA, Podgorski CA, Karuza J. Prescribing statement. Exercise and type 2 diabetes. Med Sci Sports exercise for older adults: a needs assessment comparing Exerc. 2010; 42(12):2 282-2303. primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, and phy- 31. Stevens JA, Burns E. A CDC Compendium of Effec- sician assistants. Gerontol Geriatr Educ. 2006; 26(3): tive Fall Interventions: What Works for Community- 81-99. Dwelling Older Adults. 3rd ed. Atlanta, Ga.: Centers 16. Chodzko-Zajko WJ, Proctor DN, Fiatarone Singh MA, et for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for al. American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Injury Prevention and Control; 2015. Exercise and physical activity for older adults. Med Sci 32. Waters DL, Ward AL, Villareal DT. Weight loss in obese Sports Exerc. 2009;4 1(7): 1510-1530. adults 65 years and older: a review of the controversy. 17. Owen N, Healy GN, Matthews CE, Dunstan DW. Too Exp Gerontol. 2013; 48(10): 1054-1061. much sitting: the population health science of seden- 33. Bolam KA, van Uffelen JG, Taaffe DR. The effect of tary behavior. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2010; 38(3):1 05-113. physical exercise on bone density in middle-aged and 18. Knight E, Stuckey MI, Petrella RJ. Prescribing physical older men: a systematic review. Osteoporos Int. 2013; activity through primary care: does activity intensity 24(11): 2749-2762. matter? Phys Sportsmed. 2014;4 2(3): 78-89. 34. Gómez-Cabello A, et al. Effects of training on bone 19. Litt MD, Kleppinger A, Judge JO. Initiation and main- mass in older adults: a systematic review. Sports Med. tenance of exercise behavior in older women: predic- 2012;4 2(4):3 01-325. tors from the social learning model. J Behav Med. 2002; 35. Ries AL, Bauldoff GS, Carlin BW, et al. Pulmonary reha- 25(1): 83-97. bilitation: joint ACCP/AACVPR evidence-based clinical 20. Gillespie LD, Robertson MC, Gillespie WJ, et al. Inter- practice guidelines. Chest. 2007; 131(5 suppl): 4S-42S. ventions for preventing falls in older people living in 36. Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology. PARmed-X: the community. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012; (9): Physical activity readiness medical examination. 2002. CD007146. http://uwfitness.uwaterloo.ca/PDF/parmedx.pdf. 21. Nelson ME, Rejeski WJ, Blair SN, et al. Physical activ- Accessed September 10, 2016. ity and public health in older adults: recommendation 37. Escalante Y, et al. Effects of exercise on functional aero- from the American College of Sports Medicine and bic capacity in lower limb osteoarthritis: a systematic the American Heart Association. Med Sci Sports Exerc. review. J Sci Med Sport. 2011; 14(3):1 90-198. 2007;3 9(8): 1435-1445. 38. Crandall J, et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research 22. Liu CJ, Latham NK. Progressive resistance strength Group. The influence of age on the effects of lifestyle training for improving physical function in older adults. modification and metformin in prevention of diabetes. J Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009;( 3):C D002759. Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2006; 61(10):1 075-1081. 23. Ivey FM, Tracy BL, Lemmer JT, et al. Effects of strength 39. Rejeski WJ, et al.; Look AHEAD Research Group. Life- training and detraining on muscle quality: age and gen- style change and mobility in obese adults with type 2 der comparisons. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2000; diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366(13):1 209-1217. 55(3):B 152-B157. 40. Church TS, Blair SN, Cocreham S, et al. Effects of aero- 24. Garber CE, Blissmer B, Deschenes MR, et al. American bic and resistance training on hemoglobin A1c levels in College of Sports Medicine position stand. Quantity patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled and quality of exercise for developing and maintain- trial [published correction appears in JAMA. 2011; ing cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, and neuromo- 305(9): 892]. JAMA. 2010; 304(20):2 253-2262. tor fitness in apparently healthy adults: guidance for 41. Nicklas BJ, Chmelo E, Delbono O, Carr JJ, Lyles MF, prescribing exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011; 43(7): Marsh AP. Effects of resistance training with and with- 1334-1359. out caloric restriction on physical function and mobility 25. Sherrington C, Tiedemann A, Fairhall N, Close JC, Lord in overweight and obese older adults: a randomized SR. Exercise to prevent falls in older adults: an updated controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2015; 101(5): 991-999. meta-analysis and best practice recommendations. 42. Lautenschlager NT, Cox KL, Flicker L, et al. Effect of N S W Public Health Bull. 2011;2 2(3-4):7 8-83. physical activity on cognitive function in older adults at 26. Bravata DM, Smith-Spangler C, Sundaram V, et al. Using risk for Alzheimer disease: a randomized trial [published pedometers to increase physical activity and improve correction appears in JAMA. 2009; 301(3): 276]. JAMA. health: a systematic review. JAMA. 2007; 298(19): 2008;3 00(9):1 027-1037. 2296-2304. 43. Forbes D, Forbes SC, Blake CM, Thiessen EJ, Forbes S. 27. Gaught AM, Carneiro KA. Evidence for determining Exercise programs for people with dementia. Cochrane the exercise prescription in patients with osteoarthritis. Database Syst Rev. 2015; (4): CD006489. Phys Sportsmed. 2013; 41(1):5 8-65. 44. Elsawy B, Higgins KE. Physical activity guidelines for 28. Fransen M, McConnell S, Harmer AR, Van der Esch M, older adults. Am Fam Physician. 2010; 81(1): 55-59. Simic M, Bennell KL. Exercise for osteoarthritis of the 45. McDermott AY, Mernitz H. Exercise and older patients: knee. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015; (1): CD004376. prescribing guidelines. Am Fam Physician. 2006; 74(3): 29. Bartels EM, Juhl CB, Christensen R, et al. Aquatic exer- 437-444. cise for the treatment of knee and hip osteoarthritis. 46. Nied RJ, Franklin B. Promoting and prescribing exercise Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016; (3): CD005523. for the elderly. Am Fam Physician. 2002;6 5(3): 419-426. 432 American Family Physician www.aafp.org/afp Volume 95, Number 7 ◆ April 1, 2017