HOW TO MANIPULATE REST INTERVALS TO MAXIMIZE STRENGTH TRAINING EFFECTIVENESS AJ MORTARA, EDD, CSCS,*D The typical personal training session lasts one hour, including NUTRITION AND REST INTERVALS warm-up and cool-down. Some clients have even less training time The impact of diet on exercise cannot ignored. Most training due to travel, wardrobe changes needed for work, etc. Therefore, clients have a weight loss goal and employ calorie restrictions, personal trainers must be efficient, accomplishing as much work even on training days. This is an important consideration when as possible, in a narrow, often sub-optimal time window. determining rest intervals. Diet counseling with clients is beyond the scope of this article; however, if clients are on a steep calorie A common strategy is to increase training density (minutes of deficit, they may benefit from longer rest intervals between sets. work divided by total minutes in a session) by decreasing rest This is especially true if they are on a low carbohydrate diet, which intervals between sets. However, this may not always be the best will impair both performance and recoverability (10). strategy. In fact, numerous articles have been published indicating that longer rest periods between resistance exercise sets may It is important to note that all of the above factors and their produce better strength and hypertrophy outcomes (3,4,7). This impacts are subjective. Determining how long the rest interval article will review the latest evidence regarding optimal rest should be for a given session will be a combination of client intervals, and the science behind them. Alternative time saving self-reporting and the personal trainer’s observations during the strategies will also be examined. warm-up and initial exercises. IS 60 SECONDS OR LESS REST TRAINING AGE AND REST INTERVALS BETWEEN SETS GOOD? Another factor, which complicates the discussion, is the experience Exactly how long a client needs to rest between sets is level of the client, often referred to as “training age.” Training age dependent upon numerous factors. Some of these factors can impact rest intervals in a variety of ways. Clients with a low include age, the type and intensity of the exercise performed, training age (i.e., beginners) are usually not able to safely sustain the total accumulated fatigue of the client, and a client’s high training loads. Therefore, their programs tend to utilize more training experience. accessory movements, have fewer multi-joint lifting movements, and are performed at a lower intensity. Perhaps the most crucial factor in determining rest interval length is the type and intensity of the exercise performed. Core These programs can take the form of circuit training and involve movements, which recruit large amounts of muscle mass, such very low rest intervals (about 30 s) (6). As a client develops and as squats or deadlifts, require longer rest intervals. Research shifts towards hypertrophy and strength programs, their work literature suggests a minimum of two minutes or more between capacity increases, as well as their fatigue tolerance. This leads sets, with as long as five minutes being acceptable (3,6,7). to more multi-joint lifting movements, heavier loads, and longer For accessory, or single joint, movements, such as biceps curls rest periods (2 – 5 min). A personal trainer will have to use their or calf raises, rest periods of 1 – 2 min are likely sufficient for judgement to determine when these shifts can occur within the most populations. greater framework of the clients’ program. HOW SLEEP AND STRESS SHOULD ADJUSTING REST INTERVALS EACH SESSION IMPACT REST INTERVALS With so many factors impacting rest interval length, it becomes The second most critical factor is the total accumulated fatigue clear that a client-to-client and session-to-session approach is of the client. This is a difficult factor to quantify and largely out best. Adjusting programming on a session-to-session basis, based of the hands as the personal trainer. Factors which contribute on performance, or perceived capacity is termed “autoregulation” to cumulative fatigue are sleep, stress, and diet. It is well known (3). This can be accomplished in a variety of ways, using both that sleep quality and quantity impact exercise performance (1). quantitative (e.g., monitoring heart rate) and qualitative data, (e.g., Therefore, on days when clients are exhausted from poor sleep using rating of perceived exertion [RPE] or repetitions in reserve quality, an increase in rest interval is warranted; a decrease in scales). The goal is to tailor microcycles and mesocycles to client training volume and intensity may also be necessary. Stress also abilities by balancing fatigue and performance. Autoregulation is a plays a major role in exercise performance (9). far-reaching concept that applies to training volume, intensity, rest intervals, and exercise selection. Many clients live busy, stressful lives, which is often reflected in the gym. For example, training loads and volumes that were Applying autoregulatory principles to rest interval length involves manageable last week, can become exhausting or even impossible assessing a client’s fatigue level and lengthening or shortening this week due to stress from work or home. It is the personal the interval accordingly. There are a few fatigue factors to trainer’s job to observe and react accordingly by lengthening rest consider: cardiovascular, local muscle, and mental fatigue. Unless intervals and potentially altering the session plan. a client has a specific cardiovascular goal that is being met 20 PTQ 10.1 | NSCA.COM Copyright National Strength and Conditioning Association 2023 PTQ 10.1 HOW TO MANIPULATE REST INTERVALS TO MAXIMIZE STRENGTH TRAINING EFFECTIVENESS during resistance training, high heart and breathing rates are not USING SUPERSETS AND DROP SETS beneficial, and will negatively impact future set performance. If time constraints still inhibit a client’s ability to complete their Poorly trained clients will likely require additional rest time to program, other time saving strategies, such as supersets and allow for cardiovascular recovery. Monitoring heart rate during drop sets, can be employed to maximize efficiency. Supersetting sessions can help quantify these needs, but subjective report from involves performing two exercises back-to-back with no rest the client is also satisfactory. Rest intervals greater than three between them (5). A common strategy includes pairing agonist minutes are likely required. and antagonist movements such as a chest movement followed by an upper back movement or a quadriceps movement followed MUSCULAR FATIGUE AND REST INTERVALS by a hamstring movement. Table 1 shows a sample total body It may seem obvious, but local muscle fatigue can also negatively superset program. impact successive set performance. As a result, rest intervals often need to be lengthened on successive sets to ensure full recovery; Another common time-saving strategy is drop set training. Drop for example, a two-minute rest after the first set, three minutes set training involves performing multiple sets of an exercise, after the second and so on. This is not limited to the agonist reducing the load on each successive set with no rest interval muscles only, synergists and stabilizing muscles must recover fully between them (5). For example, a client may squat 225 lb for prior to successive sets. their first set, 185 lb for their second, and 135 lb for their final set. Obviously, fatigue will be high, and therefore a long rest interval In addition to muscular fatigue, mental fatigue will also limit may be needed upon completion. Load reductions will vary based performance. In essence, if a client does not “feel ready,” on client tolerance and total volume per muscle group, however, regardless of their physical readiness (e.g., muscle soreness), researchers have recommended 20 – 25% (5). additional rest is required. Mental preparedness allows for a greater focus on movement technique and muscle contraction; Evidence suggests that both supersetting and drop setting are this is referred to as the “mind muscle connection” and has effective at developing muscular hypertrophy and strength (5). been shown to improve exercise performance and adaptations However, it is unclear if they are as effective as traditional straight (8). Therefore, the ideal recovery interval is long enough to sets. Ultimately, it is likely a tradeoff: training more muscle groups substantially decrease heart rate, eliminate local muscle fatigue, with less volume per muscle versus training fewer muscle groups and restore mental focus. with additional volume per muscle. HOW TO USE AUTOREGULATION FOR REST INTERVALS While research on autoregulation does not suggest a specific minimum or maximum rest interval, it is important to balance the need for rest, with training density and client time constraints. A reasonable strategy is to assign rest interval lengths within the 2 – 5 min range established by research, and then autoregulate within that range. TABLE 1. SAMPLE TOTAL BODY SUPER SET PROGRAM Chest press Bent-over rows Rest Shoulder press Lat pulldown Rest Biceps curls Triceps pushdowns Rest Leg press Romanian deadlift Rest Calf raise Anterior toe raise Rest Ab curl-up Back extension Note: Perform both movements back-to-back, completing an autoregulated rest period between sets PTQ 10.1 | NSCA.COM 21 Copyright National Strength and Conditioning Association 2023 HOW TO MANIPULATE REST INTERVALS TO MAXIMIZE STRENGTH TRAINING EFFECTIVENESS CIRCUIT TRAINING CAN BE AN 4. Henselmans, M, and Schoenfeld, B. The effect of inter-set EXCELLENT ALTERNATIVE rest intervals on resistance exercise-induced muscle hypertrophy. Clients with a low training age often struggle with supersets Sports Medicine 44: 1635-1643, 2014. and drop sets due to their low fatigue thresholds. Furthermore, 5. Iversen, V, Norum, M, Schoenfeld, B, and Fimland, M. No they may struggle with higher relative loads due to their lack of time to lift? Designing time-efficient training programs for neural recruitment. Therefore, the use of circuits is an effective strength and hypertrophy: a narrative review. Sports Medicine 51: time-saving alternative for those not ready for more traditional 2079-2095, 2021. strength training. Circuit training is the systematic completion of movements with little to no rest between them, which is 6. Ratamess, N, Alvar, B, Evetoch, T, Housh, R, Kibler, B, Kraemer, typically more cardiovascular in nature and not ideal for muscle W, and Triplett, N. Progression models in resistance training for hypertrophy or strength. However, clients with a low training healthy adults. Position statement from the American College of age are very sensitive to training and will likely show substantial Sports Medicine. Retrieved July 13, 2022 from https://journals.lww. benefits from this form of training. After a base of general com/acsm-msse/Fulltext/2009/03000/Progression_Models_in_ physical fitness is established, through circuit training, they can Resistance_Training_for.26.aspx. be transitioned to any of the aforementioned strategies. A sample 7. Schoenfeld, B, Pope, Z, Benik, F, Hester, G, Sellers, J, Nooner, total body circuit program is provided in Table 2. J, et al. Longer interset rest periods enhance muscle strength and hypertrophy in resistance-trained men. Journal of Strength and QUALITY OVER QUANTITY Conditioning Research 30(7): 1805-1812, 2016. In summary, longer rest intervals (three minutes or more), are likely superior for strength and hypertrophy, with an autoregulated 8. Schoenfeld, B, Vigotsky, A, Contreras, B, Golden, S, Alto, approach being optimal. Therefore, personal trainers should A, Larson, R, Winkelman, N, and Paoli, A. Differential effects of consider a quality over quantity approach, choosing longer attentional focus strategies during long-term resistance training. rest intervals, with a lower overall training density per session. European Journal of Sport Science 18(5): 705-712, 2018. Employing techniques such as supersets or drop sets can be 9. Stults-Kolehmainen, M, and Bartholomew, J. Psychological appropriate and effective strategies to save time. stress impairs short-term muscular recovery from resistance exercise. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 44(11): REFERENCES 2220-2227, 2012. 1. Dolezal, B, Neufeld, E, Boland, D, Martin, J, and Cooper, C. Interrelationship between sleep and exercise: A systematic review. 10. Wroble, K, Trott, M, Schweitzer, G, Rahman, R, Kelly, P, and Advances in Preventative Medicine 1-14, 2017. Weiss, E. Low-carbohydrate, ketogenic diet impairs anaerobic exercise performance in exercise-trained women and men: A 2. Greig, L, Hemingway, BH, Aspe, R, Cooper, K, Comfort, P, and randomized-sequence crossover trial. Journal of Sports Medicine Swinton, P. Autoregulation in resistance training: Addressing the and Physical Fitness 59(4): 600-607, 2019. inconsistencies. Sports Medicine 50: 1873-1887, 2020. 3. Grgic, J, Lazinica, B, Mikulic, P, Krieger, J, and Schoenfeld, B. The effects of short versus long inter-set rest intervals in resistance training on measures of muscle hypertrophy: A systematic review. European Journal of Sport Science 17(8): 983-993, 2017. TABLE 2. SAMPLE TOTAL BODY CIRCUIT TRAINING PROGRAM Squats 20 repetitions Romanian deadlifts 20 repetitions Chest press 20 repetitions Seated horizontal rows 20 repetitions Seated vertical rows 20 repetitions Biceps curls 20 repetitions Triceps extensions 20 repetitions Planks (30 – 45 s) Note: Perform these movements in a series, with as little rest as possible between exercises. Completing as many circuits as appropriate for the client’s ability. *Substitute dumbbells or kettlebells for barbells where needed. 22 PTQ 10.1 | NSCA.COM Copyright National Strength and Conditioning Association 2023 HOW TO MANIPULATE REST INTERVALS TO MAXIMIZE NSCA.com STRENGTH TRAINING EFFECTIVENESS ABOUT THE AUTHOR AJ Mortara is an Associate Professor at Berea College, chairs the Health and Human Performance Department, and directs the human performance laboratory. Mortara teaches in the exercise science curriculum, including classes such as sports nutrition, exercise physiology, biomechanics, personal training certification, and others. Mortara’s research interests include exercise metabolism and electromyography. Mortara received his Master’s degree from Eastern Kentucky University and his Doctorate of Education degree from the University of Kentucky. Prior to working in education, Mortara specialized in work conditioning and work hardening for Toyota Motor Manufacturing. FFFaaaccciiillliiitttyyy DDDeeesssiiigggnnn ––– FFFrrrooommm SSStttaaarrrttt tttooo FFFiiinnniiissshhh!!! C omplimentary CONSULTATION & 3D DESIGN C ompetitive PRICE QUOTE Financing OPTIONS AVAILABLE Installation & Service CALL FOR YOUR FREE GUIDE 800-556-7464OR VISIT PERFORMBETTER.COM PTQ 10.1 | NSCA.COM 23 Copyright National Strength and Conditioning Association 2023 4400008899__PPBB__FFaacciilliittyyAAdd__77xx44887755__TTCCvv33..iinndddd 11 11//1188//2233 66::1100 PPMM THE ULTIMATE STRENGTH & CONDITIONING CONFERENCE Learn from industry leaders at the 2023 NSCA National Conference, the only event JULY 12-15 that connects the entire strength and conditioning community. Join your peers from every facet of the profession for an outstanding blend of research and application. LAS VEGAS & ONLINE Discover diverse sessions on niche interests and industry advancements. Interact with Up to 3.0 CEUs authentic spearkers who hold nothing back. Explore emerging tools and technologies in the Exhibit Hall. Form powerful partnerships at networking receptions. And now, for the first time ever, earn an additional 1.0 CEUs (3.0 total) when you join us in person in Las Vegas. Reserve your spot now for the most anticipated event of the year! NSCA.com/NSCACon