S S E # 2 3 1 Sports Science Exchange (2022) Vol. 35, No. 231, 1-6 DIETARY CARBOHYDRATE AND THE ENDURANCE ATHLETE: CONTEMPORARY PERSPECTIVES Gareth A. Wallis, PhD & Tim Podlogar, PhD School of Sport, Exercise & Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom KEY POINTS • The importance of carbohydrate as a fuel source for endurance exercise and athletic performance is well established. Despite this, dietary carbohydrate recommendations for endurance athletes need to continually evolve to reflect contemporary knowledge and practice. • To ensure sufficient muscle glycogen availability, endurance competition or high-quality intense training should be preceded by daily dietary carbohydrate intakes scaled to the demands of the subsequent exercise, which from a practical perspective could mean daily carbohydrate intakes ranging from 7 to 12 g·kg-1 body mass (BM). • Consuming carbohydrate quantities of 1 to 4 g·kg-1 BM in the 1 to 4 h before exercise is recommended for exercise lasting > 60 min. In this context, pre-exercise nutrition combining glucose and fructose carbohydrate sources can optimize liver glycogen storage and endurance performance. • Carbohydrate feeding during exercise lasting > 60 min can be beneficial for performance with ingestion rates ranging from 30 to 90 g.h-1 recommended. When consuming moderate doses (i.e., 30 to 60 g.h-1) athletes can select from a range of carbohydrate types (i.e., glucose, glucose polymers, sucrose, lactose, glucose-fructose, or glucose-galactose mixes) and formats (e.g., drinks, gels, bars). At higher doses (i.e., 60 to 90 g.h-1) glucose-fructose mixtures are preferable to speed-up intestinal absorption and such blends also present athletes with the greatest flexibility for within-event modulation of carbohydrate intake. • The main aim of carbohydrate nutrition after exhaustive exercise is recovery of glycogen stores. Consumption of moderate to high glycemic index carbohydrates as soon as possible after exercise at the rate of 1.0 to 1.2 g·kg-1BM·h-1 for the first 4 hours after which a normal diet reflecting daily fuel needs is currently recommended. There may be benefit in consuming glucose-fructose based carbohydrate sources to optimize recovery of both liver and muscle glycogen stores. • Carbohydrate intakes for training should adopt a periodized approach based on the demands of training which allow the execution of the prescribed training program to elicit maximal adaptations whilst minimizing the risk of development of relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S). INTRODUCTION undertake endurance exercise. Indeed, the concept of carbohydrate The importance of carbohydrate as a fuel source for exercise and or glycogen loading is ingrained in nutrition practice within endurance athletic performance is well established. Equally well developed are sport communities. This is based on original research indicating it is dietary carbohydrate intake guidelines for endurance athletes seeking to possible to super compensate muscle glycogen stores by consuming optimize their performance (Thomas et al., 2016). Nonetheless, despite a very high carbohydrate diet before exercise, and higher muscle decades of intense carbohydrate research within the field of sports glycogen stores can extend prolonged endurance capacity (Bergstrom nutrition, new research and understanding continue to be generated & Hultman, 1967). If supercompensation is desired, athletes are and there is a need to continually evolve nutritional recommendations advised to consume carbohydrate at a quantity of 10 to 12 g·kg-1 body to reflect contemporary knowledge and practice. The purpose of this mass (BM) per day for 36 to 48 h before competition (Thomas et al., Sports Science Exchange article is to briefly present contemporary 2016). Such practices may be conducive to optimizing carbohydrate research and application perspectives regarding the role of dietary availability for prolonged sustained or high-intensity intermittent events carbohydrates for endurance athletes. A more detailed narrative review lasting > 90 min. However, when event durations are < 90 min, such of this area is presented elsewhere (Podlogar & Wallis, 2022). aggressive dietary carbohydrate intakes may not be necessary. For example, a study conducted by Sherman and colleagues (1981) found that whilst increasing dietary carbohydrate intake resulted in elevated CARBOHYDRATE INTAKE BEFORE COMPETITION pre-exercise muscle glycogen stores, this did not translate to improved It is well-known that dietary carbohydrate intake in the days and half-marathon treadmill running performance. Thus, a more appropriate hours before exercise can influence carbohydrate storage and its approach would be to scale dietary carbohydrate intake to ensure availability in the body, and consequently impact the capacity to sufficient muscle glycogen is available according to the demands of the 1 subsequent competition, which from a practical perspective could mean Whilst the precise mechanism remains to be determined, what this does daily carbohydrate intakes ranging from 7 to 12 g·kg-1 BM (Thomas et al., mean is that nutritional strategies that target liver and muscle glycogen 2016). Such an approach may also be preferable from the perspective storage will likely represent the optimal approach for carbohydrate of body mass maintenance. It is well known that water is stored in the intake before competition or intense training sessions. process of glycogen synthesis and thus excessive carbohydrate feeding relative to the demands or needs of the sport may result in an unnecessary CARBOHYDRATE INTAKE DURING EXERCISE body mass gain prior to competition. Carbohydrate feeding during exercise has been clearly demonstrated Relative to muscle glycogen, there are comparatively fewer studies that to enhance endurance capacity or performance in a variety of contexts have explored how to optimize liver glycogen availability before exercise. (Stellingwerff & Cox, 2014). The positive effects of carbohydrate feeding Liver glycogen is critical as its breakdown provides glucose to support have been largely attributed to the provision of an additional fuel source blood glucose stability during exercise, blood glucose supply for the that serves to maintain blood glucose concentrations and the use of brain and an additional fuel source for exercising muscles. Unlike muscle carbohydrate as a fuel during exercise whilst sparing use of the body’s glycogen, it does not appear liver glycogen supercompensation occurs existing glycogen stores (i.e., liver and/or muscle glycogen) (Stellingwerff (Gonzalez et al., 2016). Nonetheless, liver glycogen is reduced after an & Cox, 2014). Some evidence also suggests carbohydrate feeding may overnight fast whereas muscle glycogen remains stable (Gonzalez et positively influence the central nervous system to improve performance al., 2016). Commencing exercise with replete liver glycogen will ensure via a non-metabolic mechanism, possibly through oral carbohydrate adequate glycogen is available to maintain blood glucose concentrations sensing (Jeukendrup & Chambers, 2010). Nonetheless, our greatest during exercise. General guidelines for pre-event fueling are to consume understanding of the effects of carbohydrate feeding is through its carbohydrate in quantities ranging from 1 to 4 g·kg-1 BM during the 1 potential to contribute directly to energy metabolism during exercise. to 4 h period before exercise. Interestingly, a recent study found that One of the key approaches to determine the potential effectiveness of addition of fructose to a carbohydrate-rich breakfast improves endurance ingested carbohydrates has been to use stable or radioactive isotope capacity in trained cyclists as compared to a glucose-only based tracer techniques to measure the so-called exogenous carbohydrate carbohydrate-rich breakfast (Podlogar et al., 2022a) (Figure 1). It was oxidation (Jeukendrup & Jentjens, 2000). This simply refers to the rate proposed, based on studies of post-exercise liver glycogen metabolism at which the ingested carbohydrate is used to provide energy during (Gonzalez et al., 2016), that pre-exercise feeding of a glucose-fructose exercise. Using these approaches, it was established that within the mixture enhanced liver glycogen content due to preferential metabolism recommended range for carbohydrate intakes during exercise lasting of fructose in the liver, and this underpinned the extended endurance. 1 to 2.5 h (i.e., 30 to 60 g.h-1), most carbohydrate sources can be regarded as viable (i.e., glucose, glucose polymers, glucose-fructose [including sucrose] or glucose-galactose mixtures [including lactose]) (Jeukendrup, 2011; Odell et al., 2020). In some situations, particularly 180 when prolonged strenuous exercise exceeds 2.5 to 3 h, it may be necessary for more aggressive carbohydrate feeding strategies and 160 current guidance suggests consuming carbohydrates at rates of up to 90 g.h-1 may help to optimize carbohydrate availability for performance 140 (Thomas et al., 2016). In these situations, it is suggested that mixtures of glucose and fructose are consumed to maximize intestinal carbohydrate absorption and exogenous carbohydrate oxidation and 120 minimize incidence of gastrointestinal issues. Given the utility for glucose-fructose mixtures across the entire range of carbohydrate 100 intake recommendations (i.e., 30 to 90 g.h-1), it would seem these 80 blends present athletes with the greatest degree of flexibility to modulate 0 their carbohydrate intake within an event, if necessary. E E C C RI RI Despite the now widespread acceptance of glucose-fructose mixtures + + U U L R there remains current debate as to what constitutes the most effective G F ratio and dose. For instance, most studies and indeed guideline recommendations refer to a 2:1 glucose-fructose ratio (Jeukendrup, Figure 1: Time to task failure during cycling at an intensity corresponding to the first ventilatory threshold following a breakfast containing rice with added 2011). However, a more contemporary perspective informed by the glucose (GLU+RICE; 130.1 ± 20.0 min) or added fructose (FRU+RICE; 137.0 work of Rowlands and colleagues (2015) suggests that a glucose- ± 22.7 min, P=0.046). Bars represent mean, circles and connecting lines fructose ratio closer to unity (i.e., 1:0.8) represents the most effective represent individual participants (n = 8). blend when considering a combination of benefits including exogenous )nim( eruliaF ksaT ot emiT ]nim[ eruliaF ksaT ot emiT Sports Science Exchange (2022) Vol. 35, No. 231, 1-6 E E C C RI RI + + U U L R G F 2 Sports Science Exchange (2022) Vol. 35, No. 231, 1-6 carbohydrate oxidation, gut comfort, and endurance performance. Regarding dose, recent studies have advocated that carbohydrate Short term recovery of liver and muscle intakes up to 120 g.h-1 during exercise be considered (Hearris et glycogen stores after exhaustive exercise al., 2022; Urdampilleta et al., 2020). Indeed, the work of Hearris and colleagues (2022) was informative in demonstrating consuming 120 Glucose only Glucose-Fructose g.h-1 of carbohydrate (in a 1:0.8 glucose polymer/glucose-fructose ratio) based carbohydrates based carbohydrates as a range of formats (i.e., drink, gel chews) to be practically tolerable and elicit high exogenous carbohydrate oxidation rates during exercise. However, our recent work, whilst demonstrating superiority of consuming carbohydrate at 120 g.h-1 versus 90 g.h-1 during exercise for exogenous carbohydrate oxidation, failed to show additional benefit of the higher dose for sparing endogenous carbohydrate oxidation. (i.e., liver and/ Liver Liver or muscle glycogen) (Podlogar et al., 2022b). It would therefore seem prudent to establish if there are any clear performance advantages to consuming 120 g.h-1 before revising upwards the current consensus to Muscle Muscle consume carbohydrates at rates of up to 90 g.h-1 (Thomas et al., 2016). CARBOHYDRATE INTAKE AFTER EXERCISE The main aim of carbohydrate nutrition in the post-exercise period is recovery of liver and muscle glycogen stores. The extent to which Figure 2: Short-term recovery of muscle and liver glycogen stores after exhaustive exercise using different combinations of monosaccharides. Glucose- aggressive carbohydrate feeding is required after exercise is to a only based carbohydrates allow robust increases in muscle glycogen but large extent determined by the degree of glycogen depletion resulting sub-optimal increases in liver glycogen. Glucose-fructose based carbohydrates from exercise, the time until the subsequent exercise session, and the have been demonstrated to be very effective in replenishment of both liver and nature of that subsequent exercise (i.e., intensity). To optimize glycogen muscle glycogen stores. synthesis after exhaustive exercise athletes are recommended to consume moderate to high glycemic index carbohydrates as soon as CARBOHYDRATES FOR TRAINING possible after exercise at the rate of 1.0 to 1.2 g·kg-1 BM·h-1 for the Dietary carbohydrates play a critical role in supporting training from first 4 hours after which a normal diet reflecting daily fuel needs which several perspectives. Firstly, a dietary carbohydrate intake that ensures may be up to 12 g·kg-1 BM is suggested (Thomas et al., 2016). There is glycogen availability is sufficient to allow execution of a prescribed now sufficient evidence to suggest further refinement of guidelines to training program is of paramount importance. In this respect, facilitate short-term term recovery (i.e., hours after exhaustive exercise) contemporary approaches suggest that dietary carbohydrate intake and possibly even day-to-day recovery, particularly when considering is periodized based on the demands of training, referred to elsewhere tissue-depot specific glycogen synthesis. For example, enhanced liver as the fuel for the work required paradigm (Impey et al., 2018). Such glycogen synthesis after exercise has been observed when glucose- an approach encompasses a second important aspect of dietary fructose based carbohydrates sources are consumed as compared carbohydrates and training. That is, dietary carbohydrate availability and to glucose-only based carbohydrate sources (Decombaz et al., 2011; in particular muscle glycogen has been considered to directly modulate Fuchs et al., 2016), despite the fact fructose is a low glycemic index adaptation to endurance training. Specifically, the achievement of low carbohydrate. Muscle glycogen synthesis after exercise appears muscle glycogen because of strenuous exercise is a key signal that similar between glucose-fructose and glucose-only carbohydrates initiates training adaption at a molecular level (Philp et al., 2012). Based (Trommelen et al., 2016; Wallis et al., 2008). Accordingly, short-term on this premise, strategic dietary carbohydrate restriction (i.e., train- recovery of endurance capacity has been shown to be enhanced with low) around selected training sessions has been advocated to augment post-exercise glucose-fructose feeding (Gray et al., 2020; Maunder et training adaptation (Impey et al., 2018). However, despite the theoretical al., 2018), although this ergogenic potential has not always been seen advantages of this approach, a recent meta-analysis revealed a paucity (Podlogar et al., 2020). Nonetheless, based on the current evidence of evidence supporting strategic carbohydrate restriction to augment it could be recommended that athletes seeking to recover glycogen training-induced improvements in endurance performance (Gejl & stores as quickly as possible consider ingesting carbohydrates from a Nybo, 2021). Nonetheless, the train-low approach may offer a way for combination of glucose-based carbohydrates and fructose to optimally athletes to maximize training adaptation if they are time-limited (i.e., a stimulate both liver and muscle glycogen resynthesis (Figure 2). time-efficient strategy), or to induce additional metabolic perturbation 3 if athletes have exhausted other possibilities to improve performance (RED-S), both of which appear to have links to chronic low carbohydrate by increasing training volume. Whilst strategic carbohydrate restriction availability (Stellingwerff et al., 2021). A framework for carbohydrate may not always be necessary, the periodized approach allows for periodization in relation to the upcoming session demands is presented carbohydrate intakes based on need and may mitigate against any in Figure 3, based on the above premises of providing sufficient potential for excessive carbohydrate availability to impede training carbohydrates for training, avoiding impedance of training adaptation, adaptation. Finally, a periodized approach would minimize the potential and minimizing health risks to the athlete. for developing overtraining and/or relative energy deficiency in sport Heavy Moderate Severe (i.e., in between LT1 (i.e., below LT1) (i.e., above CP/MLSS/LT2) and CP/MLSS/LT2) <90 minutes Figure 3: Framework for carbohydrate periodization based on the demands of the upcoming exercise session. Exercise intensity domain selection refers to the highest intensity attained during the exercise session. Carbohydrate requirements are described as qualitative descriptors (i.e., low, moderate, high) with indicative quantities provided. Note, the exact carbohydrate requirements are to be personalized based on the expected energy demands of each exercise session, individual preferences, and tolerances. CHO – Carbohydrates; LT1 – Lactate Threshold 1; CP – Critical Power; MLSS – Maximal Lactate Steady State; LT2 – Lactate Threshold 2. Figure adapted from Podlogar and Wallis (2022). INDIVIDUALIZING CARBOHYDRATE INTAKE an increasing number of research studies that have directly measured Dietary carbohydrate intake guidelines for athletes are well established muscle glycogen use during various endurance-based sports (e.g., (e.g., Thomas et al., 2016) and further developed within this article. Impey et al., 2020) and perhaps these data currently represent the These ranges are a good starting point for practitioners and athletes and best practical approach in that practitioners could determine the combined with a good understanding of the general demands of training relative carbohydrate demands (i.e., low, medium, and high) of certain or competition it is possible to develop pragmatically effective dietary sessions and tailor guidance accordingly. Building from this approach, strategies. The advent of new technologies that allow the potential Jagnesakova and colleagues (2022) have introduced machine learning for enhanced physiological monitoring or understanding brings the as an approach to predicting muscle glycogen use during exercise opportunity for development of increasing individualized or personalized based on published research studies. With further development, this carbohydrate nutrition strategies. For example, more individualized may also represent a way to non-invasively predict glycogen utilization understanding of muscle glycogen utilization in training or competition to guide personalized exercise-nutrition strategies. could assist in devising a tailored dietary carbohydrate strategy. One technology that is increasingly discussed within the endurance Unfortunately, non-invasive, and cost-effective methods that might be sport community is the use of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM), used by practitioners to quantify muscle glycogen concentrations in which aims to provide athletes with insights into their individual blood field settings such as using ultrasound have so far not been shown in glucose responses to nutrition and exercise. Theoretically, knowledge independent research studies to be valid (Bone et al., 2021). There are EROFEB Commencing exercise session Low to Moderate Moderate to High with sufficient muscle glycogen 1-2 g/kg; 1-4 h before 2-4 g/kg; 1-4 h before stores is essential 2-4 g/kg; 1-4 h before GNIRUD Aggressive feeding not recommended; CHO intake recommended if CHO No carbohydrates required smaller quantities including mouth availability before session limited during training sessions rinsing advised 30-60 g/h 0-30 g/h or mouth rinsing >90 minutes EROFEB Moderate to High High High 2-4 g/kg; 1-4 h before 3-4 g/kg; 1-4 h before 3-4 g/kg; 1-4 h before GNIRUD Sports Science Exchange (2022) Vol. 35, No. 231, 1-6 EXERCISE INTENSITY DOMAIN DURATION Moderate to High High High 30-90 g/h 60-90 g/h 60-90 g/h 4 Sports Science Exchange (2022) Vol. 35, No. 231, 1-6 of blood glucose responses could allow an individual athlete to tailor nutrition strategies that combine glucose and fructose carbohydrate their carbohydrate intake in a way that ensures stable blood glucose sources appear most beneficial for enhancement of performance and levels during exercise or at least avoids the occurrence of hypoglycemia. recovery. Athletes looking to benefit from carbohydrate feeding during However, at present, the evidence suggests CGM devices for use exercise can choose from a wide range of readily oxidizable carbohydrate during exercise appear less accurate than when used under resting sources, with glucose-fructose blends (including sucrose) affording or post-prandial conditions (Clavel et al., 2022; Fabra et al., 2021). the greatest flexibility for within-event modulation of carbohydrate This suggests CGM devices may provide some utility for tailoring intake. Finally, a periodized approach to dietary carbohydrate intake carbohydrate intake to maintain blood glucose stability under non- around training will ensure athletes have sufficient fuel to execute the exercise conditions, but further research is needed to fully understand demands of training to maximize training adaptation whilst minimizing the potential of CGM to help individualize carbohydrate intake during the potential for adverse health or performance consequences (e.g., exercise. through development of RED-S). PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily • Endurance competition or high-quality intense training should reflect the position or policy of PepsiCo, Inc. be preceded by daily dietary carbohydrate intakes ranging from 7 to 12 g·kg-1 BM dependent upon energetic demands. REFERENCES • Consuming carbohydrate quantities of 1 to 4 g·kg-1 BM in the Bergstrom, J., and E. Hultman (1967). A study of glycogen metabolism in man. J. Clin. Lab. 1 to 4 h before exercise is recommended for exercise lasting Invest. 19:218-228. > 60 min; combining glucose and fructose carbohydrates Bone, J.L., M.L. Ross, K.A. Tomcik, N.A. Jeacocke, A.K.A. McKay, and L.M. Burke (2021). sources can benefit endurance performance. The validity of ultrasound technology in providing an indirect estimate of muscle • During exercise lasting > 60 min, carbohydrate intake glycogen concentrations is equivocal. Nutrients 13:2371. Clavel. P., E. Tiollier, C. Leduc, M.Fabre, M. Lacome, and M. Buchheit (2022). Concurrent ranging from 30 to 90 g.h-1 are recommended. A range of validity of a continuous glucose-monitoring system at rest and during and following a carbohydrate types (i.e., glucose, glucose polymers, sucrose, high-intensity interval training session. Int. J. Sports Physiol. Perf. 17:627–633. lactose, glucose-fructose, or glucose-galactose mixes) can Décombaz, J., R. Jentjens, M. Ith, F. Scheurer, T. Buehler, A. Jeukendrup, and C. Boesch support moderate carbohydrate intake goals (i.e., 30 to 60 (2011). Fructose and galactose enhance postexercise human liver glycogen synthesis. g.h-1). At higher doses (i.e., 60 to 90 g.h-1) glucose-fructose Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 43:1964-1971. Fabra, E.M., J.L. Díez, J. Bondia, and A.J.L. Sanz (2021). A comprehensive review of mixtures are preferable. continuous glucose monitoring accuracy during exercise periods. Sensors (Basel). • For recovery from strenuous endurance exercise, 21(2) 479-498. consumption of moderate to high glycemic index Fuchs, C.J., J.T. Gonzalez, M. Beelen, N.M. Cermak, F.E. Smith, P.E. Thelwall, R. Taylor, M.I. Trenell, E.J. Stevenson, and L.J. van Loon (2016). Sucrose ingestion after exhaustive carbohydrates with a focus on including glucose-fructose exercise accelerates liver, but not muscle glycogen repletion compared with glucose based carbohydrates as soon as possible after exercise ingestion in trained athletes. J. Appl. Physiol. 120:1328-1334. at the rate of 1.0 to 1.2 g·kg-1 BM·h-1 for the first 4 hours, Gejl, K.D., and L. Nybo (2021). Performance effects of periodized carbohydrate restriction in after which a normal diet reflecting daily fuel needs, is endurance trained athletes - a systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Int. Soc. Sports recommended. Nutr. 8:37. Gonzalez, J.T., C.J. Fuchs, J.A. Betts, and L.J. van Loon (2016). Liver glycogen metabolism • Carbohydrate intakes for training should adopt a periodized during and after prolonged endurance-type exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 311:E543-E553. approach based on the demands of training which allow the Gray, E.A., T.A. Green, J.A. Betts, and J.T. Gonzalez (2020). Postexercise glucose–fructose execution of the prescribed training program to elicit maximal coingestion augments cycling capacity during short-term and overnight recovery from adaptations whilst minimizing the risk of development of exhaustive exercise, compared with isocaloric glucose. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab 30:54–61. relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S). Hearris, M.A., J.N. Pugh, C. Langan-Evans, S.J. Mann, L. Burke, T. Stellingwerff, J.T. Gonzalez, and J.P. Morton (2022). 13C-glucose-fructose labelling reveals comparable SUMMARY exogenous CHO oxidation during exercise when consuming 120 g/h in fluid, gel, jelly chew or co-ingestion. J. Appl. Physiol. 132:1394-1406. Despite decades of intense carbohydrate research within the field of Impey, S.G., E. Jevons, G. Mees, M. Cocks, J. Strauss, N. Chester, I. Laurie, D. Target, A. sports nutrition, new knowledge continues to be generated with the Hodgson, S.O. Shepherd, and J.P. Morton (2020).. Glycogen utilization during running: potential to inform practice. To ensure sufficient muscle glycogen intensity, sex, and muscle-specific responses. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 52:1966–1975. availability, endurance competition or high-quality intense training Jagnesakova, D., D.M. Dunne, J.L. Areta, C.E. Lefevre, X. Yan, R. Mazorra, and S. Impey should be preceded by daily dietary carbohydrate intakes scaled to (2022). A machine learning approach to predicting muscle glycogen use during the demands of the subsequent exercise. The optimization of liver and exercise. 2022. Nutrients - in review. Jeukendrup, A.E. (2011) Nutrition for endurance sports: Marathon, triathlon, and road muscle glycogen content in the hours before and hours directly after cycling. J. Sports Sci. 29:S91-S99. exercise are important goals for carbohydrate nutrition. In this respect, 5 Sports Science Exchange (2022) Vol. 35, No. 231, 1-6 Jeukendrup, A.E., and R. Jentjens (2000). Oxidation of carbohydrate feedings during prolonged exercise. Sports Med. 29:407–424. Jeukendrup, A.E., and E.S. Chambers. Oral carbohydrate sensing and exercise performance. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 13:447-451. Maunder, E., T. Podlogar, and G.A. Wallis (2018). Postexercise fructose–maltodextrin ingestion enhances subsequent endurance capacity. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 50:1039– 1045. Odell, O.J., T. Podlogar, and G.A. Wallis (2020). Comparable exogenous carbohydrate oxidation from lactose or sucrose during exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 52:2663– 2672. Olsson, K.‐E., and B. Saltin (1970). Variation in total body water with muscle glycogen changes in man. Acta Physiol. Scand. 80:11–18. Philp, A., M. Hargreaves, and K. Baar (2012). More than a store: Regulatory roles for glycogen in skeletal muscle adaptation to exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 302:E1343-E1351. Podlogar, T., and G.A. Wallis (2020). Impact of post-exercise fructose-maltodextrin ingestion on subsequent endurance performance. Front. Nutr. 7:82. Podlogar, T., and G.A. Wallis (2022). New horizons in carbohydrate research and application for endurance athletes. Sports Med. In press. Podlogar, T., S. Cirnski, S. Bokal, N. Verdel, and J. Gonzalez (2022a). Addition of fructose to a carbohydrate-rich breakfast improves cycling endurance capacity in trained cyclists. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. In press. Podlogar, T., S. Bokal, S. Cirnski, and G.A. Wallis (2022b). Increased exogenous but unaltered endogenous carbohydrate oxidation with combined fructose-maltodextrin ingested at 120 g·h-1 versus 90 g·h-1 at different ratios. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. In press. Rowlands, D.S., S. Houltham, K. Musa-Veloso, F. Brown, L. Paulionis, and D. Bailey (2015). Fructose–glucose composite carbohydrates and endurance performance: critical review and future perspectives. Sports Med. 45:1561–1576. Sherman, W.M., D.L. Costill, W.J. Fink, and J.M. Miller (1981). Effect of exercise-diet manipulation on muscle glycogen and its subsequent utilization during performance. Int. J. Sports Med. 2:114–118. Stellingwerff,T., and G.R. Cox (2014). Systematic review: Carbohydrate supplementation on exercise performance or capacity of varying durations. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 39:998-1011. Stellingwerff, T., I.A. Heikura, R. Meeusen, S. Bermon, S. Seiler, M.L. Mountjoy, and L.M. Burke (2021). Overtraining syndrome (OTS) and relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S): Shared pathways, symptoms and complexities. Sports Med. 51:2251-2280. Thomas, D.T., K.A. Erdman, and L.M. Burke (2016). Nutrition and athletic performance. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 48:543–568. Trommelen, J., M. Beelen, P.J. Pinckaers, J.M. Senden, N.M. Cermak, and L.J. Van Loon (2016). Fructose coingestion does not accelerate postexercise muscle glycogen repletion. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 48:907-912. Urdampilleta, A., S. Arribalzaga, A. Viribay, A. Castañeda-Babarro, J. Seco-Calvo, and J. Mielgo-Ayuso (2020). Effects of 120 vs. 60 and 90 g/h carbohydrate intake during a trail marathon on neuromuscular function and high intensity run capacity recovery. Nutrients 12:2094. Wallis, G.A., C.J. Hulston, C.H. Mann, H.P. Roper, K.D. Tipton, and A.E. Jeukendrup (2008). Postexercise muscle glycogen synthesis with combined glucose and fructose ingestion. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 40:1789–1794. 6