Comment Using verbal autopsy to enhance mortality surveillance Reliable and timely mortality data are necessary for TB cause-specific mortality rates. Consequently, Chu See Articles page e1278 assessing the effectiveness of health programmes and and colleagues attributed the reduction in all-cause guiding health policy1 and resource allocation. Civil mortality in these sub-Saharan African countries to registration and vital statistics (CRVS) are the primary improved availability of efficacious treatments for these source of mortality data for high-income countries that leading causes of death. Although non-communicable have well-established CRVS systems. However, low- diseases were the predominant causes of death among income and middle-income countries, particularly those adults aged 60 years and older in all sites, the non- in sub-Saharan Africa, have weak CRVS systems limited communicable disease-related mortality rates did not by under-reporting and poor quality data, particularly increase over time in most of the HDSS sites. However, for causes of death.2 WHO estimates that only trends in maternal mortality varied by site; some sites 10% of deaths in the African region are registered, with showed no significant changes while others reported a only 8% of those having a documented cause of death.2,3 decrease. Furthermore, more than two thirds of registered causes This study was conducted at a time when there is of death are not medically certified. Verbal autopsy with growing attention towards strengthening mortality a simple instrument developed for electronic capture surveillance and use of mortality data for decision making, of illness information is recommended for identifying particularly in African countries. The Africa Centers for cause of death if medical certification has not been done Disease Control and Prevention, through their mortality or is not available.4 surveillance programme, is engaging with ministries of In the Lancet Global Health, Yue Chu and colleagues5 health to explore the potential utility of HDSS platforms report their findings from an analysis of demographic in improving national mortality statistics.6 The Article and verbal autopsy data from nine health and by Chu and colleagues5 has effectively showcased the demographic surveillance system (HDSS) sites, which potential value of HDSS verbal autopsy data to improve belong to the Analysing Longitudinal Population- the estimation of mortality rates and causes of death in Based HIV/AIDS Data on Africa (ALPHA) network, countries with weak CRVS systems. Such data could be across six countries in eastern and southern Africa. instrumental in defining priority health problems and These 9 HDSS sites had a combined population of evaluating the effect of public health programmes and 1 071 913 people over the study period. Chu and provide data for guiding national policy. colleagues calculated all-cause mortality rates for each Although verbal autopsy is a convenient and cost- HDSS by sex, age group, and 5-year calendar periods effective approach to identifying causes of death in from 1995 to 2019. Using the InSilicoVA algorithm, HDSS platforms, postmortem examination of tissues they assigned causes of death and applied cause- combined with clinical information is the gold standard specific mortality fractions to estimate population- for cause of death determination.7 In our opinion, the level cause-specific mortality rates. accuracy of cause of death data from these HDSS sites This analysis included 52 484 deaths, of which could have been improved by including postmortem 47 961 (91·4%) had verbal autopsy results. Of those data, particularly from HDSS sites that have minimally with a verbal autopsy, 46 570 (97·1%) had their cause of invasive tissue sampling (MITS) for community-based death identified. Chu and colleagues found a reduction and facility-based deaths. The Child Health Mortality in all-cause mortality rates over time in all age groups, Prevention Surveillance (CHAMPS) is working with all HDSS sites, and in both men and women. The seven HDSS sites in sub-Saharan Africa and southeast decrease in all-cause mortality was most pronounced Asia to provide accurate cause of death information among people aged 20–59 years and between 2005 and based on MITS with extensive laboratory testing.8,9 The 2009. These findings suggest substantial progress in inclusion of HDSS sites that participate in postmortem achieving Sustainable Development Goal 3. The periods studies, such as the CHAMPS sites, could have provided with the greatest reduction in all-cause mortality rates additional insights on causes of death, including also corresponded to the largest reductions in HIV and detailed information on causative agents. The use of this www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024 e1217 Comment postmortem data, through machine learning, could be 1 Leitao J, Chandramohan D, Byass P, et al. Revising the WHO verbal autopsy instrument to facilitate routine cause-of-death monitoring. maximised to enhance the accuracy of verbal autopsy Glob Health Action 2013; 6: 21518. cause of death algorithms. 2 WHO. Civil registration and vital statistics strategic implementation plan 2021–25. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2021. These exciting findings by Chu and colleagues strongly 3 WHO. Civil registration and vital statistics fact sheet. Geneva: World Health support the need for regular analyses of verbal autopsy Organization, 2024. 4 WHO. Verbal autopsy standards: ascertaining and attributing causes of data from HDSS sites. By providing accurate information death tool. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2022. on the changing patterns in causes of death over 5 Chu Y, Marston M, Dube A, et al. Temporal changes in cause of death among adolescents and adults in six countries in eastern and southern time, such analyses could significantly guide national Africa in 1995–2019: a multi-country surveillance study of verbal autopsy and regional public health programmes in allocating data. Lancet Glob Health 2024; 12: e1278–87. 6 Nkengasong J, Gudo E, Macicame I, et al. Improving birth and death data resources and developing targeted interventions. for African decision making. Lancet Glob Health 2020; 8: e35–36. 7 De Cock KM, Zielinski-Gutiérrez E, Lucas SB. Learning from the dead. We declare no competing interests. N Engl J Med 2019; 381: 1889–91. Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 8 Cunningham SA, Shaikh NI, Nhacolo A, et al. Health and demographic Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. surveillance systems within the child health and mortality prevention surveillance network. Clin Infect Dis 2019; 69 (suppl 4): S274–79. *Dickens Onyango, Benard Awuonda 9 Taylor AW, Blau DM, Bassat Q, et al. Initial findings from a novel macdickens2002@gmail.com population-based child mortality surveillance approach: a descriptive study. Lancet Glob Health 2020; 8: e909–19. Kisumu County Department of Health, Kisumu 3670-40100, Kenya (DO); Maseno University, Kisumu, Kenya (BA) e1218 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh Vol 12 August 2024