Physical activity Fact sheet Key facts Popular ways to be active include walking, cycling, wheeling, sports, active recreation and play, and • Physical activity can be done at any level of skill and for enjoyment has significant by everybody. health benefits for hearts, bodies Regular physical activity is proven to help prevent and minds. and manage noncommunicable diseases such as heart disease, stroke, diabetes and several • Physical activity cancers. It also helps prevent hypertension, contributes maintain healthy body weight and can improve to preventing mental health, quality of life and well-being. and managing How much of physical activity is noncommunicable diseases such as recommended? cardiovascular diseases, cancer and diabetes. • Physical activity reduces symptoms of WHO guidelines and recommendations provide depression and anxiety. details for different age groups and specific population groups on how much physical activity • Physical activity enhances thinking, learning, is needed for good health. and judgment skills. WHO recommends: • Physical activity ensures healthy growth and development in young people. For children under five years of age • Physical activity improves overall well-being. In a 24-hour day, infants (less than one year) should: • be physically active several times a day in a • Globally, one in four adults do not meet the variety of ways, particularly through interactive global recommended levels of physical activity. floor-based play; more is better. For those not • Up to five million deaths a year could yet mobile, this includes at least 30 minutes in be averted if the global population was prone position (tummy time) spread throughout more active. the day while awake • People who are insufficiently active have a 20% • not be restrained for more than one hour at to 30% increased risk of death compared to a time (e.g. prams/strollers, high chairs, or people who are sufficiently active. strapped on a caregiver’s back): • More than 80% of the world’s adolescent º screen time is not recommended population is insufficiently physically active. • when sedentary, engaging in reading and storytelling with a caregiver is encouraged, and What is physical activity? • have 14–17 hours (0–3 months of age) or 12–16 hours (4–11 months of age) of good WHO defines physical quality sleep, including naps. activity as any bodily movement produced In a 24-hour day, children 1–2 years of age should: by skeletal muscles • spend at least 180 minutes in a variety of that requires energy types of physical activities at any intensity, expenditure. Physical including moderate- to vigorous-intensity activity refers to all physical activity, spread throughout the day; movement including during more is better leisure time, for transport • not be restrained for more than one hour to get to and from places, at a time (e.g. prams/strollers, high chairs, or as part of a person’s or strapped on a caregiver’s back) or sit for work. Both moderate- and extended periods of time: vigorous-intensity physical activity improve health. 2 Physical activity fact sheet º for one-year olds, sedentary screen time (such as watching TV or videos, playing computer games) is not recommended º for those aged two years, sedentary screen time should be no more than one hour; less is better • when sedentary, engaging in reading and storytelling with a caregiver is encouraged, and • have 11–14 hours of good quality sleep, including naps, with regular sleep and wake-up times. Adults aged 18–64 years In a 24-hour day, children 3–4 years of age should: • should do at least 150–300 minutes of • spend at least 180 minutes in a variety of types moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity of physical activities at any intensity, of which • or at least 75–150 minutes of vigorous- at least 60 minutes is moderate- to vigorous- intensity aerobic physical activity; or an intensity physical activity, spread throughout equivalent combination of moderate- and the day; more is better vigorous-intensity activity throughout the week • not be restrained for more than one hour at a • should also do muscle-strengthening time (e.g. prams/strollers) or sit for extended activities at moderate or greater intensity that periods of time: involve all major muscle groups on two or º sedentary screen time should be no more more days a week, as these provide additional than one hour; less is better. health benefits • when sedentary, engaging in reading and • may increase moderate-intensity aerobic storytelling with a caregiver is); encourage, and physical activity to more than 300 minutes; • have 10–13 hours of good quality sleep, or do more than 150 minutes of vigorous- which may include a nap, with regular sleep intensity aerobic physical activity; or an and wake-up times. equivalent combination of moderate- and vigorous-intensity activity throughout the week for additional health benefits For more information • should limit the amount of time spent being World Health Organization. sedentary; replacing sedentary time with Guidelines on physical physical activity of any intensity (including light activity, sedentary behaviour intensity) provides health benefits, and and sleep for children under • to help reduce the detrimental effects of high five years of age levels of sedentary behaviour on health, all adults and older adults should aim to do more than the recommended levels of moderate- to Children and adolescents aged 5–17 years vigorous-intensity physical activity • should do at least an average of 60 minutes per day of moderate-to-vigorous intensity, mostly Adults aged 65 years and above aerobic, physical activity, across the week • same as for adults, and • should incorporate vigorous-intensity aerobic • as part of their weekly physical activity, activities, as well as those that strengthen older adults should do varied multicomponent muscle and bone, at least three days a week physical activity that emphasizes functional • should limit the amount of time spent balance and strength training at moderate being sedentary, particularly the amount of or greater intensity, on three or more days recreational screen time. a week, to enhance functional capacity and to prevent falls. Physical activity fact sheet 3 Pregnant and postpartum women • to help reduce the detrimental effects of high levels of sedentary behaviour on health, all All pregnant and postpartum women without adults and older adults should aim to do more contraindication should: than the recommended levels of moderate- to • do at least 150 minutes vigorous-intensity physical activity. of moderate-intensity aerobic physical Children and adolescents living with disability: activity throughout • should do at least an average of 60 minutes the week per day of moderate-to-vigorous intensity, • incorporate a variety mostly aerobic, physical activity, across the week of aerobic and muscle- • should incorporate vigorous-intensity strengthening activities aerobic activities, as well as those that • should limit the amount of time spent being strengthen muscle and bone, at least three sedentary; replacing sedentary time with days a week physical activity of any intensity (including light • should limit the amount of time spent intensity) provides health benefits. being sedentary, particularly the amount of People living with chronic conditions recreational screen time. (hypertension, type 2 diabetes, HIV and Adults living with disability: cancer survivors) • should do at least 150–300 • should do at least 150–300 minutes of minutes of moderate-intensity moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity aerobic physical activity • or at least 75–150 minutes of vigorous- • or at least 75–150 minutes intensity aerobic physical activity; or an of vigorous-intensity aerobic equivalent combination of moderate- and physical activity; or an vigorous-intensity activity throughout the week. equivalent combination of • should also do muscle-strengthening activities moderate- and vigorous-intensity activity at moderate or greater intensity that involve throughout the week all major muscle groups on two or more days a week, as these provide additional • should also do muscle-strengthening activities health benefits at moderate or greater intensity that involve all major muscle groups on two or more • as part of their weekly physical activity, days a week, as these provide additional older adults should do varied multicomponent health benefits physical activity that emphasizes functional balance and strength training at moderate • as part of their weekly physical activity, or greater intensity, on three or more days older adults should do varied multicomponent a week, to enhance functional capacity and physical activity that emphasizes functional to prevent falls balance and strength training at moderate • may increase moderate-intensity aerobic or greater intensity, on three or more days physical activity to more than 300 minutes; a week, to enhance functional capacity and or do more than 150 minutes of vigorous- to prevent falls intensity aerobic physical activity; or an • may increase moderate-intensity aerobic equivalent combination of moderate- and physical activity to more than 300 minutes; vigorous-intensity activity throughout the week or do more than 150 minutes of vigorous- for additional health benefits intensity aerobic physical activity; or an • should limit the amount of time spent equivalent combination of moderate- being sedentary; replacing sedentary time with and vigorous-intensity activity throughout the physical activity of any intensity (including light week for additional health benefits intensity) provides health benefits 4 Physical activity fact sheet • should limit the amount of time spent being Physical inactivity is one of the leading risk sedentary; replacing sedentary time with factors for noncommunicable diseases mortality. physical activity of any intensity (including light People who are insufficiently active have a 20% to intensity) provides health benefits 30% increased risk of death compared to people who are sufficiently active. • help reduce the detrimental effects of high levels of sedentary behaviour on health, all Regular physical activity can: adults and older adults should aim to do more • improve muscular and cardiorespiratory fitness than the recommended levels of moderate- to • improve bone and functional health vigorous-intensity physical activity • reduce the risk of hypertension, coronary • it is possible to avoid sedentary behaviour heart disease, stroke, diabetes, various types and be physically active while sitting or lying, of cancer (including breast cancer and colon for example, upper body led activities, inclusive cancer), and depression and/or wheelchair-specific sport and activities. • reduce the risk of falls as well as hip or vertebral fractures, and • help maintain a healthy body weight. For more information World Health Organization. In children and adolescents, physical activity Guidelines on physical activity improves: and sedentary behaviour. • physical fitness (cardiorespiratory and Geneva: World Health muscular fitness) Organization; 2020. • cardiometabolic health (blood pressure, dyslipidaemia, glucose, and insulin resistance) • bone health Benefits and risks of physical • cognitive outcomes (academic performance, activity and sedentary behaviour executive function) • mental health (reduced symptoms Regular physical activity, such as walking, of depression) cycling, wheeling, doing sports or active • reduced adiposity. recreation, provides significant benefits for health. Some physical activity is better than doing none. In adults and older adults, higher levels of physical By becoming more active throughout the day in activity improves: relatively simple ways, people can easily achieve • risk of all-cause mortality the recommended activity levels. • risk of cardiovascular disease mortality • incident hypertension • incident site-specific cancers (bladder, breast, colon, endometrial, oesophageal adenocarcinoma, gastric and renal cancers) • incident type-2 diabetes • prevents of falls • mental health (reduced symptoms of anxiety and depression) • cognitive health • sleep • measures of adiposity may also improve. Physical activity fact sheet 5 For pregnant and post-partum women Levels of physical activity Physical activity confers the following maternal globally and fetal health benefits: a decreased risk of: • more than a quarter of the world’s • pre-eclampsia adult population (1.4 billion adults) are • gestational hypertension insufficiently active • gestational diabetes (for example 30% • worldwide, around one in three women and one reduction in risk) in four men do not do enough physical activity to stay healthy • excessive gestational weight gain • levels of inactivity are twice as high in high- • delivery complications income countries compared to low-income • postpartum depression countries • there has been no improvement in global levels • newborn complications of physical activity since 2001 • and physical activity has no adverse effects on • insufficient activity increased by 5% (from birthweight or increased risk of stillbirth. 31.6% to 36.8%) in high-income countries Health risks of sedentary behaviour between 2001 and 2016. Increased levels of physical inactivity have negative impacts on health systems, the environment, economic development, community well-being and quality of life. Globally, 28% of adults aged 18 and over were not active enough in 2016 (men 23% and women 32%). This means they do not meet the global recommendations of at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity, or 75 minutes vigorous- intensity physical activity per week. Lives are becoming increasingly sedentary, In high-income countries, 26% of men and 35% through the use of motorized transport and the of women were insufficiently physically active, as increased use of screens for work, education compared to 12% of men and 24% of women in and recreation. Evidence shows higher amounts low-income countries. Low or decreasing physical of sedentary behaviour are associated with the activity levels often correspond with a high or rising following poor health outcomes: gross national product. In children and adolescents: The drop in physical activity is partly due to • increased adiposity (weight gain) inaction during leisure time and sedentary behaviour on the job and at home. Likewise, • poorer cardiometabolic health, fitness, an increase in the use of “passive” modes of behavioural conduct/pro-social behaviour transportation also contributes to insufficient • reduced sleep duration. physical activity. In adults: Globally, 81% of adolescents aged 11–17 years were insufficiently physically active in 2016. • all-cause mortality, cardiovascular disease Adolescent girls were less active than adolescent mortality and cancer mortality boys, with 85% vs. 78% not meeting WHO • incidence of cardiovascular disease, cancer recommendations of at least 60 minutes of and type-2 diabetes. moderate to vigorous intensity physical activity per day. 6 Physical activity fact sheet How to increase physical • sports and recreation facilities provide opportunities for everyone to access and activity? participate in a variety of different sports, Countries and communities must take action dance, exercise and active recreation, and to provide everyone with more opportunities to • health care providers advise and support be active, in order to increase physical activity. patients to be regularly active. This requires a collective effort, both national and local, across different sectors and disciplines WHO response to implement policy and solutions appropriate to a country’s cultural and social environment In 2018 WHO launched a new Global Action Plan to promote, enable and encourage physical activity. on Physical Activity 2018–2030 which outlines Policies to increase physical activity aim to four policy actions areas and 20 specific policy ensure that: recommendations and actions for Member States, • walking, cycling and other forms of active international partners and WHO, to increase non-motorized forms of transport are physical activity worldwide. The global action plan accessible and safe for all calls for countries, cities and communities to adopt a “whole-of-system” response involving all sectors • labour and workplace policies encourage and stakeholders taking action at global, regional active commuting and opportunities for being and local levels to provide the safe and supportive physically active during the work day environments and more opportunities to help • childcare, schools and higher education people increase their levels of physical activity. institutions provide supportive and safe spaces and facilities for all students to spend their free In 2018, the World Health Assembly agreed on time actively a global target to reduce physical inactivity by • primary and secondary schools provide quality 15% by 2030 and align with the Sustainable physical education that supports children to Development Goals. The commitments made by develop behaviour patterns that will keep them world leaders to develop ambitious national SDG physically active throughout their lives responses provides an opportunity to refocus and • community-based and school-sport renew efforts at promoting physical activity. programmes provide appropriate opportunities for all ages and abilities Physical activity fact sheet 7 The WHO toolkit ACTIVE launched in 2019 provides NCD risk factors. The GPAQ has been integrated more specific technical guidance on how to start into the WHO STEPwise approach, which is a and implement the 20 policy recommendations surveillance system for the main NCD risk factors. outlined in the global action plan. To assess physical activity among schoolchildren The global action plan and ACTIVE propose policy WHO has collaborated on a questionnaire options that can be adapted and tailored to local module which has been integrated into the Global culture and contexts to help increase levels of school-based student health survey (GSHS). physical activity globally, these include: The GSHS is a WHO/US CDC surveillance project designed to help countries measure and assess • the development and implementation of the behavioural risk factors and protective factors national guidelines for physical activity for all in 10 key areas among young people aged 13 to age groups 17 years. • establishing national coordinating mechanisms WHO is also working with international experts involving all relevant government departments on the development of methods and instruments and key nongovernment stakeholders to assess physical activity in children under the to develop and implement coherent and age of five years of age and under 10 years of age. sustainable policy and actions plans In addition, WHO is testing the use of digital and • implementing community wide communication wearable technologies, such as pedometers campaigns to raise awareness and knowledge and accelerometers, in national population of the multiple health, economic and social surveillance of physical activity in adults. benefits of being physically active This work will be extended to include children and will inform the development of updated • invest in new technologies, innovation and global guidance on the monitoring of physical research to develop cost effective approaches activity and sedentary behaviours. to increasing physical activity, particularly in low resource contexts To support a “whole of system” response, WHO is collaborating across multiple sectors to strengthen • ensure regular surveillance and monitoring of coordination, advocacy and alignment of policy physical activity and policy implementation. and actions. WHO has established partnerships to help support Member States in their efforts to promote physical activity – these include working For more information with the United Nations Educational, Scientific Global action plan and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) to advance on physical activity and align the implementation of GAPPA and the 2018–2030: more active Kazan Action Plan on physical education, sports people for a healthier world and physical activity. WHO is also working with many other UN agencies in the shared agenda to promote Sport for Development and Peace. Within the sports system WHO is collaborating with the To help countries and communities measure International Olympic Committee and International physical activity in adults, WHO has developed Sports Federations, the International Federation of the Global Physical Activity Questionnaire (GPAQ). Football Associations, FIFA, and others to support This questionnaire helps countries monitor and strengthen the promotion of health through insufficient physical activity as one of the main sports and the sports for all agenda. Photo credits (cover) Young girl skipping © Riccardo Niels Mayer Young boy holding a soccer ball © dr322 All other photos © WHO WHO/HEP/HPR/RUN/2021.2 – © World Health Organization 2021. Some rights reserved. This work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence. 8 Physical activity fact sheet