Guidelines World Health Organization 2020 guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour Fiona C Bull ,1,2 Salih S Al- Ansari,3 Stuart Biddle,4 Katja Borodulin,5,6 Matthew P Buman ,7 Greet Cardon,8 Catherine Carty,9,10 Jean-P hilippe Chaput ,11 Sebastien Chastin ,12 Roger Chou,13 Paddy C Dempsey,14,15 Loretta DiPietro,16 Ulf Ekelund ,17,18 Joseph Firth,19,20 Christine M Friedenreich,21 Leandro Garcia,22 Muthoni Gichu,23 Russell Jago ,24 Peter T Katzmarzyk,25 Estelle Lambert ,26 Michael Leitzmann,27 Karen Milton ,28 Francisco B Ortega,29 Chathuranga Ranasinghe,30 Emmanuel Stamatakis ,31 Anne Tiedemann,32 Richard P Troiano ,33 Hidde P van der Ploeg,34,35 Vicky Wari,36 Juana F Willumsen1 For numbered affiliations see ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION end of article. Objectives To describe new WHO 2020 guidelines on In 2018, the World Health Assembly (WHA) physical activity and sedentary behaviour. approved a new Global Action Plan on Physical Correspondence to Methods The guidelines were developed in accordance Activity (GAPPA) 2018–20301 and adopted a new Professor Fiona C Bull, Physical Activity Unit, Department of with WHO protocols. An expert Guideline Development voluntary global target to reduce global levels of Health Promotion, World Health Group reviewed evidence to assess associations physical inactivity in adults and adolescents by Organization, Geneva, GE, between physical activity and sedentary behaviour 15% by 2030. As part of the WHA Resolution Switzerland; b ullf@ who.i nt for an agreed set of health outcomes and population (WHA71.6), Member States requested that WHO groups. The assessment used and systematically updated update the 2010 Global Recommendations on Accepted 7 September 2020 Published Online First recent relevant systematic reviews; new primary Physical Activity for Health.2 1 December 2020 reviews addressed additional health outcomes or Global and national guidelines on physical subpopulations. activity are a central component of a comprehen- Results The new guidelines address children, sive and coherent governance and policy frame- adolescents, adults, older adults and include new specific work for public health action. WHO recommends recommendations for pregnant and postpartum women all countries establish national guidelines and set and people living with chronic conditions or disability. physical activity targets. To help support popula- All adults should undertake 150–300 min of moderate- tions to achieve the targets and maintain healthy intensity, or 75–150 min of vigorous- intensity physical levels of physical activity, all countries are advised activity, or some equivalent combination of moderate- to develop and implement appropriate national intensity and vigorous- intensity aerobic physical activity, and subnational policies and programmes to enable per week. Among children and adolescents, an average people of all ages and abilities to be physically active of 60 min/day of moderate- to- vigorous intensity aerobic and improve health. physical activity across the week provides health benefits. Given that the most recent global estimates The guidelines recommend regular muscle- strengthening show that one in four (27.5%) adults3 and more activity for all age groups. Additionally, reducing than three- quarters (81%) of adolescents4 do not sedentary behaviours is recommended across all age meet the recommendations for aerobic exercise, groups and abilities, although evidence was insufficient as outlined in the 2010 Global Recommendations to quantify a sedentary behaviour threshold. on Physical Activity for Health,2 there is an urgent Conclusion These 2020 WHO guidelines update need to increase priority and investment directed previous WHO recommendations released in 2010. towards services to promote physical activity both They reaffirm messages that some physical activity is within health and other key sectors. These data also better than none, that more physical activity is better reveal no overall improvement in global levels of for optimal health outcomes and provide a new participation over the last two decades and substan- recommendation on reducing sedentary behaviours. tial gender differences.3 4 Furthermore, national These guidelines highlight the importance of regularly data consistently show inequalities in participation undertaking both aerobic and muscle strengthening by age, gender, disability, pregnancy, socioeconomic activities and for the first time, there are specific status and geography,1 amplifying the need to inten- © Author(s) (or their recommendations for specific populations including for sify investment in physical activity. employer(s)) 2020. Re- use pregnant and postpartum women and people living with permitted under CC BY. chronic conditions or disability. These guidelines should This paper reports on the development of new Published by BMJ. be used to inform national health policies aligned with WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary To cite: Bull FC, Al- the WHO Global Action Plan on Physical Activity 2018– behaviour.5 These guidelines provide evidence- Ansari SS, Biddle S, 2030 and to strengthen surveillance systems that track based public health recommendations concerning et al. Br J Sports Med progress towards national and global targets. the amount (frequency, intensity, duration) and 2020;54:1451–1462. types of physical activity that offer significant health Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 1451 Guidelines Table 1 Glossary of terms Term Definition Aerobic physical activity Activity in which the body’s large muscles move in a rhythmic manner for a sustained period of time. Aerobic activity—also called endurance activity—improves cardiorespiratory fitness. Examples include walking, running, swimming and bicycling. Balance training Static and dynamic exercises that are designed to improve an individual’s ability to withstand challenges from postural sway or destabilising stimuli caused by self- motion, the environment or other objects. Bone-s trengthening activity Physical activity primarily designed to increase the strength of specific sites in bones that make up the skeletal system. Bone-s trengthening activities produce an impact or tension force on the bones that promotes bone growth and strength. Examples include any type of jumps, running and lifting weights. Disability From the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health, an umbrella term for impairments, activity limitations and participation restrictions, denoting the negative aspects of the interaction between an individual (with a health condition) and that individual’s contextual factors (environmental and personal factors). Domains of physical activity Physical activities can be undertaken in various domains, including one of more of the following: leisure, occupation, education, home and/or transport. Household domain physical Physical activity undertaken in the home for domestic duties (such as cleaning, caring for children, gardening, etc). activity Leisure-d omain physical Physical activity performed by an individual that is not required as an essential activity of daily living and is performed at the discretion of the activity individual. Examples include sports participation, exercise conditioning or training and recreational activities such as going for a walk, dancing and gardening. Light-i ntensity physical On an absolute scale, light intensity refers to physical activity that is performed between 1.5 and 3 METs. On a scale relative to an individual’s activity (LPA) personal capacity, light- intensity physical activity is usually a 2–4 on a rating scale of perceived exertion scale of 0–10. Examples include slow walking, bathing or other incidental activities that do not result in a substantial increase in heart rate or breathing rate. Metabolic equivalent of task The metabolic equivalent of task, or simply metabolic equivalent, is a physiological measure expressing the intensity of physical activities. One (MET) MET is the energy equivalent expended by an individual while seated at rest, usually expressed as mLO2/kg/min. Moderate- intensity physical On an absolute scale, moderate- intensity refers to the physical activity that is performed between 3 and <6 times the intensity of rest (METs). On a activity (MPA) scale relative to an individual’s personal capacity, MPA is usually a 5 or 6 on a rating scale of perceived exertion scale of 0–10. Moderate-t o- vigorous On an absolute scale, MVPA refers to the physical activity that is performed at >3 METs (ie, >3 times the intensity of rest). On a scale relative to intensity physical activity an individual’s personal capacity, MPA is usually a 5 or above on a scale of 0–10. (MVPA) Multicomponent physical Multicomponent physical activity are activities that can be done at home or in a structured group or class setting and combine all types of exercise activity (aerobic, muscle strengthening and balance training) into a session, and this has been shown to be effective. An example of a multicomponent physical activity programme could include walking (aerobic activity), lifting weights (muscle strengthening) and could incorporate balance training. Examples of balance training can include walking backwards or sideways or standing on one foot while doing an upper body muscle- strengthening activity, such as bicep curls. Dancing also combines aerobic and balance components. Occupation domain physical See work domain physical activity. activity Physical activity (PA) Any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that requires energy expenditure. Physical inactivity An insufficient physical activity level to meet present physical activity recommendations. Recreational screen time Time spent watching screens (television (TV), computer, mobile devices) for purposes other than those related to school or work. Sedentary screen time Time spent watching screen- based entertainment while sedentary, either sitting, reclining or lying. Does not include active screen-b ased games where physical activity or movement is required. Sedentary behaviour Any waking behaviour characterised by an energy expenditure of 1.5 METs or lower while sitting, reclining or lying. Most desk-b ased office work, driving a car and watching television are examples of sedentary behaviours; these can also apply to those unable to stand, such as wheelchair users. The guidelines operationalise the definition of sedentary behaviour to include self-r eported low movement sitting (leisure time, occupational and total), TV viewing or screen time and low levels of movement measured by devices that assess movement or posture. Transport domain physical Physical activity performed for the purpose of getting to and from places, and refers to walking, cycling and wheeling (ie, the use of non-m otorised activity means of locomotion with wheels, such as scooters, roller- blades, manual wheelchair, etc). In some contexts, operation of a boat for transport could also be considered transport- related physical activity. Vigorous-i ntensity physical On an absolute scale, vigorous intensity refers to physical activity that is performed at 6.0 or more METs. On a scale relative to an individual’s activity (VPA) personal capacity, VPA is usually a 7 or 8 on a rating scale of perceived exertion scale of 0–10. Work domain physical activity Physical activity undertaken during paid or voluntary work. benefits and mitigate health risks (for definitions see table 1). recommendations for physical activity and sedentary behaviour These guidelines have been developed for children, adolescents, across the life course. adults, older adults and, for the first time, include specific recom- The primary audiences and users of these guidelines are policy mendations on physical activity for pregnant and postpartum makers in ministries of health, education, sport, transport, envi- women and people living with chronic conditions or disability. ronment, social or family welfare and related sectors, working In addition, for the first time, these WHO guidelines address the in high- income as well as low-i ncome and middle- income coun- health impact of sedentary behaviour. The new WHO guidelines tries (LMICs), who formulate country- specific guidelines and update previous WHO recommendations on physical activity who develop national or subnational plans and programmes to for health released in 20102 with the most recent advances in increase physical activity and reduce sedentary behaviours across the evidence base for these behaviours and associated selected the life course. Additional key users of these guidelines include health consequences. These new guidelines, together with the researchers and those working in health services providing Guidelines on Physical Activity, Sedentary Behaviour and Sleep advice and guidance (such as community health workers, for Children Under 5 Years of Age,6 provide evidence- updated primary, secondary or tertiary nurses or doctors), allied health 1452 Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 Guidelines Table 2 Criteria for determination of the certainty of evidence (A) and interpretation of the strength of recommendations (B) A Criteria for determining the certainty of evidence High Very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect. Moderate Moderately confident in the effect estimate. The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different. Low Confidence in the effect estimate is limited. The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect. Very low Very little confidence in the effect estimate. The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect. B Interpretation of the strength of recommendation Strong recommendation Strong recommendations communicate the message that the guideline is based on the confidence that the desirable effects of adherence to the recommendation outweigh the undesirable consequences. Conditional recommendations Conditional recommendations are made when there is less certainty about the balance between the benefits and harms or disadvantages of implementing a recommendation, or if the recommendations might not be applicable to all the population group. and exercise professionals and non-g overnmental organisations. developed to inform the Physical Activity Guidelines for Amer- Communication of these guidelines to members of the public is icans, second edition13 was used and updated. Where gaps in essential and requires tailoring of the core messages to appro- existing evidence were identified, new umbrella reviews were priate and accessible language and formats relevant to cultural commissioned and full details of these are available elsewhere.5 contexts in order to be effective. To update the systematic reviews, an agreed set of search terms, databases and search methods, as well as standardised data METHODS AND PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING THE WHO extraction protocols, were employed to update the evidence. GUIDELINES A search for systematic reviews and pooled analyses of cohort The guidelines were developed in accordance with the processes studies was conducted for the period from 2017 up to September set out in the WHO Handbook for Guidelines Development7 2019. The following databases were searched: PubMed, and commenced in 2019. A Guideline Development Group CINAHL, MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsychInfo, SportDiscus and (GDG) was established comprising relevant experts from Cochrane to identify reviews that were peer- reviewed, written required disciplines as well as policy makers and end users of the in English with no restriction on country or country income recommendations, with regional and gender balance. Details of group and inclusive of reviews including studies using subjective the members of the GDG are available.5 or objectively measured physical activity or sedentary behaviour. At the first meeting in July 2019, the GDG reviewed and Searches were limited to the English language, due to resource finalised the scope of the guidelines and agreed on the set of constraint and previous experience in the field indicating that population, intervention or exposure, comparator and outcome other language searches yielded very few, if any additional (PI/ECO) questions and critical and important outcomes to be reviews.14 Table 3 provides a summary of the health outcomes assessed (table 2). The GDG did not include sleep as a behaviour assessed for each subpopulation. within the scope of these guidelines but did recognise sleep as Reviews that examined an association (based on levels above an important health outcome when considering the impact of or below a threshold of physical activity or sedentary behaviour), physical activity. Between August and February 2020, the WHO and also reviews that explored the dose- response relation- secretariat coordinated the commissioning of literature searches ship between these behaviours and health-r elated outcomes and systematic evidence reviews and the GDG subworking were considered. In addition, six new umbrella reviews were groups met virtually to review, summarise and draft preliminary commissioned to address health outcomes and populations not recommendations. addressed by the above recent national physical activity guide- lines; these umbrella reviews focused on the health impact of Updating searches and new evidence reviews physical activity in people living with HIV/AIDS, osteoporosis The WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary and sarcopenia, the prevention of falls in older adults, the risk behaviour were developed by using, and systematically updating, of adverse outcomes in adults and the health impacts of occupa- the evidence collated for the development of other recent tional physical activity. national physical activity guidelines that met the following three The GDG reconvened in February 2020 to review the evidence criteria: (1) the evidence reviews had been conducted according and finalise a draft set of recommendations. They examined the to standard and rigorous systematic processes that were well quality of research contributing to each outcome identified in the documented; (2) the assessment of the certainty of the evidence PI/ECO questions and assessed the overall certainty of evidence used the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Develop- (table 2) taking into consideration the risk of bias, inconsistency, ment and Evaluation (GRADE) method or an equivalent meth- imprecision, indirectness of the evidence and publication bias odology that was clearly described and documented and (3) the across each outcome, using the GRADE framework to rate the evidence reviews addressed the populations of interest with no certainty of the evidence for each PE/ICO.15 Evidence profiles restrictions to country or country income level. detailing this information for each PI/ECO are available. For these guidelines on children and adolescents, systematic The GDG considered the proposed wording of the recom- reviews undertaken by Poitras et al,8 Carson et al9 and Okely et mendations and rated the strength of the recommendations as al10 were used and updated. For pregnant women, the system- strong or conditional (table 2) based on the balance of benefits atic review conducted to inform the 2019 Canadian Guideline to harms, the certainty of evidence, sensitivity to values and pref- for Physical Activity Throughout Pregnancy11 was used and erences and the potential impact on gender, social and health updated. For all other age and subpopulation groups, the scien- equity, as well as acceptability, feasibility and resource implica- tific report12 of the Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Group tions. The assessment of the overall certainty of the evidence Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 1453 Guidelines 1454 Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 sweiver ecnedive senilediug labolg 0202 eht ni desserdda spuorg noitalupop yb )redro lacitebahpla ni( semoctuo htlaeh fo yrammuS 3 elbaT 56 revo stludA 81 revo stludA stludA stluda dna nerdlihC tsop dna ycnangerP sraey sraey sraey 46–81 *ytilibasid htiw *snoitidnoc cinorhC mutrap AP BS AP BS dna AP sraey 71–5 †ecnatropmI semoctuO lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC thgiew ,lortnoc thgiew ,egnahc thgiew ,niag thgiew—ytisopidA ecnanetniam thgiew dna sutats thgiew ,ytilibats lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC stneve esrevdA dna recnac—lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC ytilatrom cfiiceps -esuac dna esuac -llA cfiiceps -recnac lacitirC htlaeh enoB lacitirC htlaeh cilobatemoidraC ,ktS ,DP ,SM—lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC semoctuo evitingoC DHDA ,hcS tnatropmI snoitacilpmoc yrevileD VIH ,D2T ,TH—lacitirC noissergorp esaesiD recnac—lacitirC ecnerrucer lacitirC seirujni detaler -llaf dna sllaF lacitirC semoctuo lateF lacitirC ytiliba lanoitcnuF lacitirC sutillem setebaid lanoitatseG lacitirC aispmalce -erp/noisnetrepyh lanoitatseG ,DI ,ICS ,SM—lacitirC VIH ,D2T ,TH—lacitirC tnatropmI tnatropmI efil fo ytilauq detaler -htlaeH hcS ,DCM lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC recnac fo ecnedicnI lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC DVC fo ecnedicnI tnatropmI tnatropmI noisnetrepyh fo ecnedicnI lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC setebaid 2 epyt fo ecnedicnI lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC lacitirC )noisserped dna yteixna fo smotpmys( htlaeh latneM lacitirC sisoropoetsO lacitirC ssentfi lacisyhP ,DI ,ICS ,SM—lacitirC VIH ,D2T ,TH—lacitirC noitcnuf lacisyhP ktS ,DP tnatropmI ruoivaheb laicosorP tnatropmI semoctuo laicosohcysP DI ,ICS ,SM—lacitirC VIH ,D2T ,TH—lacitirC snoitidnoc dibromoc fo ksiR tnatropmI tnatropmI tnatropmI peelS .DCM ,DHDA ,hcS ,ktS ,DP ,DI ,ICS ,SM ,D2T ,TH :detsil sa noitidnoc noitalupopbus rof era semoctuO* .gnikam -noisiced ot lacitirc ton tub ,tnatropmi si taht emoctuo na :emoctuo tnatropmI .gnikam -noisiced ot lacitirc si taht emoctuo na :emoctuo lacitirC† ;ruoivaheb yratnedes ,BS ;esaesid s’nosnikraP ,DP ;ytivitca lacisyhp ,AP ;sisorelcs ralucsum ,SM ;noisserped lacinilc rojam ,DCM ;ytilibasid lautcelletni ,DI ;noisnetrepyh ,TH ;esaesid ralucsavoidrac ,DVC ;redrosid ytivitcarepyh ticfied noitnetta ,DHDA .setebaid 2 epyt ,D2T ;srovivrus ekorts ni ,ktS ;yrujni droc lanips ,ICS ;ainerhpozihcs ,hcS Guidelines for each population group was based on an assessment across activity beyond 60 min of MVPA daily provide additional health all evaluated outcomes (table 2). The GDG prioritised all-c ause benefits. There was insufficient evidence to determine whether mortality and cardiovascular mortality as the most critical specific health benefits vary by type or domain of physical activity. outcomes, followed by other clinical outcomes (eg, falls, depres- The evidence showed clearly that increased time in aerobic sion, cognition, health-r elated quality of life), then interme- MVPA increases cardiorespiratory fitness and that increased diate outcomes (eg, cardiometabolic markers, other metabolic muscle- strengthening activities increases muscular fitness, with markers) as well as physical activity risk and harms. Where there some evidence showing incremental benefits of doing both. was a lack of subpopulation- specific evidence, the evidence for One notable update from the 2010 guidelines was evidence to the general population was extrapolated but downgraded due to support changing from ‘at least’ 60 min to ‘an average of’ 60 min indirectness, when appropriate. The GDG came to consensus on of MVPA per day as this was deemed to more closely reflect the each recommendation as well as the strength of recommenda- body of evidence and the way MVPA has been measured. The tion ratings and voting was not required. physical activity recommendation was rated as strong based on As required by the WHO process for guideline development, overall moderate certainty evidence. The evidence indicated that the draft guidelines were externally reviewed by seven indepen- greater time spent in sedentary behaviour is related to adverse dent reviewers, who provided feedback on the scientific evidence, health outcomes. The association between sedentary behaviour its interpretation and the content of the guidelines. In addition, and adverse health outcomes is generally stronger for television the draft guidelines and the evidence profiles were made avail- viewing or recreational screen time as the specific exposure vari- able to the public and stakeholders, and feedback was sought able than for total sedentary time in youth. There was, however, through a global online consultation conducted between March insufficient evidence to set a precise threshold (or ‘cut- off’) for and April 2020 and that received over 400 contributions. These the amount of sedentary or recreational screen time. The seden- inputs from scientists, practitioners and the general public were tary behaviour recommendation was rated as strong based on collated and used by the GDG to finalise the guidelines. These low certainty evidence. were approved by the WHO Guidelines Review Committee in August 2020. Recommendations for adults (18–64 years) THE 2020 GUIDELINES ON PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND The evidence reaffirms that all adults should regularly under- SEDENTARY BEHAVIOUR take physical activity and that some physical activity is better The final recommendations on physical activity and sedentary than none. The adult guidelines include strong recommenda- behaviour for each population group are summarised in table 4. tions based on overall moderate- certainty evidence on weekly For all populations, doing some physical activity is better than volumes of aerobic and muscle-s trengthening physical activity. doing none. If individuals are not currently meeting these recom- Many of the benefits of physical activity are observed within mendations, doing some physical activity will bring benefits to average weekly volumes of 150–300 min of moderate intensity health. Individuals should start with small amounts of physical or 75–150 min of vigorous intensity, or an equivalent combi- activity and gradually increase frequency, intensity and dura- nation of MVPA. The weekly range of recommended aerobic tion over time. The GDG concluded that the benefits of doing activity volume is a notable difference compared with the 2010 physical activity and limiting sedentary behaviour outweighed WHO recommendations that only specified minimum weekly the potential harms. Any potential harms may be managed by a thresholds. MVPA bouts of any duration now count towards gradual increase in the amount and intensity of physical activity. these recommendations, reflecting new evidence to support Pre- exercise medical clearance is generally unnecessary. Indi- the value of total physical activity volume, regardless of bout viduals who are not currently regularly active and have no length.16 This recommendation differs from the requirement of contraindications can be recommended to commence and grad- bouts of at least 10 min in the previous WHO 2010 guidelines. ually increase levels and intensity of physical activity without There is moderate- certainty evidence of a curvilinear dose- a medical clearance. An individual who is habitually engaging response association between physical activity volume and some in moderate- intensity activity can gradually increase to vigorous health outcomes, such as all-c ause and cardiovascular disease intensity activity without needing to consult a healthcare (CVD) mortality, and incident cancer and diabetes. Health bene- provider. Those who develop new symptoms when increasing fits occur with levels of physical activity below the recommen- their levels of activity should consult a healthcare provider. dations, supporting the statement that some physical activity These guidelines are for the general population and do not is better than none. More physical activity is better, although address the benefits and harms experienced by athletes under- the relative benefits tend to diminish at higher levels of phys- taking the types and amounts of activity necessary to improve ical activity. However, it is not possible to specify the physical performance- related fitness for participation in competition. activity levels where diminishing returns begin. For this reason, The evidence supporting each of the updated or new recom- the new recommendation that aerobic physical activity volumes mendations is summarised for each group. Further details, higher than 300 min of moderate- intensity activity per week, including a more detailed narrative summary of evidence and or 150 min of vigorous- intensity activity per week have addi- the evidence profile tables summarising the evidence used for all tional health benefits, is rated as conditional. Beyond aerobic recommendations, are available from WHO.5 physical activity, additional health benefits will occur through participation in muscle- strengthening activities at moderate or Recommendations for children and adolescents (5–17 years) greater intensity on 2 or more days a week, a strong recommen- The evidence affirmed that physical activity in children and dation supported by moderate- certainty evidence. There was adolescents is associated with improved physical, mental and no evidence to support a dose-r esponse association with higher cognitive health outcomes. Many of the benefits of physical volumes of muscle- strengthening activities. activity are observed with an average of 60 min of moderate- There was insufficient evidence to determine whether specific to- vigorous physical activity (MVPA) daily, although physical health benefits vary by type or domain of physical activity. Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 1455 Guidelines Table 4 Summary of the WHO Guidelines on physcial activity and sedentary behaviour. These public health guidelines are for all populations across the age groups from 5 years of age and above, irrespective of gender, cultural background or socioeconomic status and are relevant for people of all abilities. Those with chronic medical conditions and/or disability and pregnant and postpartum women should try to meet these recommendations where possible and as able. Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Children and adolescents In children and adolescents, physical activity confers benefits for the following In children and adolescents, higher amounts of sedentary (aged 5–17 years), including health outcomes: physical fitness (cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness), behaviour are associated with detrimental effects on the those living with disability cardiometabolic health (blood pressure, dyslipidaemia, glucose and insulin following health outcomes: fitness and cardiometabolic resistance), bone health, cognitive outcomes (academic performance, executive health, adiposity, behavioural conduct/pro- social behaviour function) and mental health (reduced symptoms of depression) and reduced and sleep duration. adiposity. It is recommended that: It is recommended that: ► Children and adolescents should limit the amount of ► Children and adolescents should do at least an average of 60 min/day of time spent being sedentary, particularly the amount of moderate- to- vigorous intensity, mostly aerobic, physical activity, across the recreational screen time. week; Strong recommendation ► Vigorous- intensity aerobic activities, as well as those that strengthen muscle and bone should be incorporated at least 3 days a week. Strong recommendation Adults In adults, physical activity confers benefits for the following health outcomes: all- In adults, higher amounts of sedentary behaviour are (aged 18–64 years) including cause mortality, cardiovascular disease mortality, incident hypertension, incident associated with detrimental effects on the following those with chronic conditions type 2 diabetes, incident site-s pecific cancers,mental health (reduced symptoms of health outcomes: all- cause mortality, cardiovascular and those living with anxiety and depression), cognitive health and sleep ; measures of adiposity may disease mortality and cancer mortality and incidence of disability also improve. cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes and cancer. It is recommended that: It is recommended that: ► All adults should undertake regular physical activity; ► Adults should limit the amount of time spent being ► Adults should do at least 150–300 min of moderate- intensity aerobic physical sedentary. Replacing sedentary time with physical activity, or at least 75–150 min of vigorous- intensity aerobic physical activity, activity of any intensity (including light intensity) or an equivalent combination of moderate- intensity and vigorous- intensity provides health benefits; activity throughout the week for substantial health benefits; ► To help reduce the detrimental effects of high levels of ► Adults should also do muscle- strengthening activities at moderate or greater sedentary behaviour on health, adults should aim to intensity that involve all major muscle groups on 2 or more days a week, as do more than the recommended levels of moderate-t o- these provide additional health benefits. vigorous physical activity. Strong recommendation Strong recommendation ► Adults may increase moderate- intensity aerobic physical activity to >300 min, or do >150 min of vigorous- intensity aerobic physical activity, or an equivalent combination of moderate- intensity and vigorous- intensity activity throughout the week for additional health benefits (when not contraindicated for those with chronic conditions). Conditional recommendation Older adults In older adults, physical activity also helps prevent falls and falls-r elated injuries As for adults (aged 65 years and older) and declines in bone health and functional ability. Strong recommendation including those with chronic It is recommended that: conditions and those living As for adults, plus with disability ► As part of their weekly physical activity, older adults should do varied multicomponent physical activity that emphasises functional balance and strength training at moderate or greater intensity on 3 or more days a week, to enhance functional capacity and to prevent falls. Strong recommendation Pregnant and postpartum In women, physical activity during pregnancy and the postpartum period confers ► Pregnant and postpartum women should limit the women benefits for the following maternal and fetal health outcomes: reduced risk of pre- amount of time spent being sedentary. Replacing eclampsia, gestational hypertension, gestational diabetes, excessive gestational sedentary time with physical activity of any intensity weight gain, delivery complications and postpartum depression and no increase in (including light intensity) provides health benefits. risk of stillbirth, newborn complications or adverse effects on birth weight. Strong recommendation It is recommended that all pregnant and postpartum women without contraindication should: ► undertake regular physical activity throughout pregnancy and post partum; ► do at least 150 min of moderate- intensity aerobic physical activity throughout the week for substantial health benefits; ► incorporate a variety of aerobic and muscle- strengthening activities. Adding gentle stretching may also be beneficial. In addition: Women who, before pregnancy, habitually engaged in vigorous- intensity aerobic activity or who were physically active can continue these activities during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Strong recommendation Continued 1456 Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 Guidelines Table 4 Continued These public health guidelines are for all populations across the age groups from 5 years of age and above, irrespective of gender, cultural background or socioeconomic status and are relevant for people of all abilities. Those with chronic medical conditions and/or disability and pregnant and postpartum women should try to meet these recommendations where possible and as able. Physical activity Sedentary behaviour Additional explanatory and practical notes: Some physical activity is better than none. If not currently meeting these recommendations, doing some physical activity will bring benefits to health. Start with small amounts of physical activity and gradually increase frequency, intensity and duration over time. Pre- exercise medical clearance is generally unnecessary for individuals without contraindications prior to beginning light-i ntensity or moderate- intensity physical activity not exceeding the demands of brisk walking or everyday living. It is important to provide all children and adolescents with safe and equitable opportunities and encouragement to participate in physical activities that are appropriate for their age and ability, that are enjoyable, and that offer variety. Older adults should be as physically active as their functional ability allows and adjust their level of effort for physical activity relative to their level of fitness. When not able to meet the recommendations, adults with chronic conditions should aim to engage in physical activity according to their abilities. Adults with chronic conditions may wish to consult with a physical activity specialist or healthcare professional for advice on the types and amounts of activity appropriate for their individual needs, abilities, functional limitations/complications, medications and overall treatment plan. If pregnant and postpartum women are not currently meeting these recommendations, doing some physical activity will bring benefits to health. They should start with small amounts of physical activity and gradually increase frequency, intensity and duration over time. Pelvic floor muscle training may be performed on a daily basis to reduce the risk of urinary incontinence. Additional on safety considerations when undertaking physical activity for pregnant women are: ► Avoid physical activity during excessive heat, especially with high humidity; ► Stay hydrated by drinking water before, during and after physical activity; ► Avoid participating in activities which involve physical contact, pose a high risk of falling or might limit oxygenation (such as activities at high altitude, when not normally living at altitude); ► Avoid activities in supine position after the first trimester of pregnancy; ► Pregnant women considering athletic competition or exercising significantly above the recommended guidelines should seek supervision from a specialist healthcare provider; ► Pregnant women should be informed by their healthcare provider of the danger signs for when to stop, or limit physical activity and to consult a qualified healthcare provider immediately if they occur. Return to physical activity gradually after delivery and in consultation with a healthcare provider in the case of delivery by caesarean section. There are no major risks to people living with disability engaging in physical activity when it is appropriate to an individual’s current activity level, health status and physical function and the health benefits accrued outweigh the risks. People living with disability may need to consult a healthcare professional or other physical activity and disability specialist to help determine the type and amount of activity appropriate for them. Physical activity accrued at work, leisure, home or during trans- range of different types of physical activity can help to improve a portation count towards the recommended amounts. wide range of elements of physical function. Moderate-c ertainty The reviewed evidence on sedentary behaviour and health evidence indicates that the risk of fall-r elated injury may be outcomes in adults provided support that all adults should reduced with multicomponent physical activity (combinations limit the amount of time spent sedentary. There was moderate- of balance, strength, endurance, gait and physical function certainty evidence that the relationship of sedentary behaviour training). As such it is recommended that as part of their weekly with all- cause and CVD mortality varies by amount of physical physical activity, older adults should do varied multicomponent activity. For other outcomes, the evidence was insufficient. New physical activity at moderate or greater intensity on 3 or more evidence on the interdependent relationship between sedentary days a week in order to enhance functional capacity and prevent behaviour and physical activity underpinned the additional guid- falls. One notable update from the previous 2010 guidelines ance that recommends increased levels of MVPA in the context is that regular participation in this type of physical activity is of high levels of sedentary time. However, there was insuffi- recommended for all older adults rather than specifically those cient evidence to specify quantitative thresholds of sedentary with poor mobility. Moderate- certainty evidence indicates that behaviour, to determine whether specific health benefits vary by programmes involving multiple exercise types probably have type or domain of sedentary behaviour or to determine the influ- significant effects on bone health and osteoporosis prevention. ence of frequency and duration of breaks in sedentary behaviour Because the evidence reviewed for sedentary behaviour in adults on health outcomes. included those over the age of 65 years, the adult recommenda- tions were deemed to also apply for this population group. Recommendations for older adults (65 years and above) The evidence reviewed on physical activity and sedentary Recommendations for pregnant and postpartum women behaviour for adults also applied to older adults for the common There is high- certainty evidence that physical activity during set of critical health outcomes (table 3), because the majority pregnancy is associated with reduced gestational weight gain and of studies employed no upper age limit and therefore included reduced risk of gestational diabetes mellitus in pregnant women adults over the age of 65 years. Additional health-r elated with overweight or obesity. There is high-c ertainty to moderate- outcomes were reviewed because of their significant importance certainty evidence that the incidence of gestational hypertension to older adults: 1) falls; 2) fall- related injuries; 3) physical func- is no different between pregnant women who exercise and those tion; 4) frailty and 5) osteoporosis. receiving standard antenatal care. New high- certainty evidence demonstrates an inverse dose- Among pregnant women with overweight or obesity, there response relationship between volume of aerobic physical is low-c ertainty to moderate-c ertainty evidence to suggest no activity and risk of physical functional limitations in older adults. increased risk of low birth weight, small for gestational age High- certainty evidence demonstrates that balance and func- or large for gestational age babies between women who are tional exercises reduce the rate of falls and that engaging in a physically active and those in standard antenatal care. There is Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 1457 Guidelines moderate-c ertainty evidence of a small, but significant, reduced Recommendations for people living with disability risk of preterm birth in mothers who engaged in vigorous phys- Evidence was reviewed for the following health conditions: ical activity. Similarly, among pregnant women with overweight multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, intellectual disability, or obesity there was no significant difference in the risk of Parkinson’s disease, stroke, major clinical depression, schizo- preterm birth between those who were physically active and phrenia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). those in standard antenatal care. Available evidence from inter- The following health outcomes were examined: comorbidity, vention trials combining both aerobic and muscle- strengthening physical functioning, cognition and quality of life, but not all physical activity support the recommendation for regular outcomes were assessed for each condition. This evidence strength training to be included for pregnant and postpartum was considered together with the evidence for those without women. disability and the resulting recommendations were extrapolated No direct evidence was reviewed on sedentary behaviour for to be applicable to people with disability in general. this subpopulation; however, the GDG reviewed the evidence for Physical activity is considered safe and beneficial for people general populations and concluded it was applicable. Therefore, living with disability without contraindications, and there are the sedentary behaviour recommendations for adults are extrap- no major risks when it is appropriate to an individual’s current olated to pregnant and postpartum women and the certainty of activity level, health status and physical functioning level. Adults the evidence downgraded for indirectness. living with disability may need to consult a healthcare profes- sional or other physical activity and disability specialist to help determine the type and amount of activity appropriate for them. Recommendations for people living with chronic conditions In people with spinal cord injury, low-c ertainty and moderate- Physical activity is considered safe for adults living with the certainty evidence suggests physical activity reduces shoulder selected chronic conditions without contraindications, and the pain and improves vascular function in paralysed limbs. Insuf- ficient evidence was available to determine the relationship benefits generally outweigh the risks. Evidence was reviewed for between physical activity and comorbid conditions in individuals the following chronic conditions: cancer, hypertension, type 2 with intellectual disability or multiple sclerosis. There is high- diabetes and HIV. Greater physical activity is related to improved certainty evidence showing that physical activity can improve health outcomes in people living with coronary heart disease. functioning in people with multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury Among adults with type 2 diabetes, there is high- certainty and a history of stroke. For people with intellectual disability evidence that physical activity is associated with decreased risk or Parkinson’s disease, this evidence is of low certainty and of CVD mortality and decreased levels of haemoglobin A1c, high certainty, respectively. Limited evidence was available for blood pressure, body mass index and lipids. Among adults with the relationship between physical activity and quality of life in hypertension, there is high- certainty evidence that physical people with multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury and intellectual activity decreases risk of progression of cardiovascular disease disability. However, for people with schizophrenia and major and reduces blood pressure, while there is moderate- certainty clinical depression there was moderate- certainty evidence for evidence that physical activity reduces the risk of CVD mortality. beneficial effects on quality of life. Moderate-c ertainty evidence High- certainty evidence shows that physical activity performed indicates that physical activity can have beneficial effects on postcancer diagnosis is related to lower risks of mortality from cognition in people with multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, all causes and mortality from cancer in female breast cancer a history of stroke, ADHD and major clinical depression. For survivors and colorectal cancer survivors. people with schizophrenia this evidence was of high certainty. Given that large numbers of people are currently living The evidence on the associations between sedentary behaviour with HIV and that antiretroviral therapy has become effective and health outcomes in children, adolescents and adults living and widely available, HIV is now considered a chronic condi- with disability was derived from literature reviewed for the tion. Thus, evidence on people living with HIV are included general populations. The GDG concluded that these recommen- in these guidelines for the first time. There was moderate- dations could be extrapolated to children, adolescents, adults certainty evidence that in people living with HIV, physical and older adults living with disability, according to their specific activity enhances health-r elated quality of life, maximal oxygen ability, but downgraded the certainty of the evidence due to indi- consumption, exercise tolerance, general health and physical rectness. The GDG agreed that benefits accrued from reducing functioning. There was moderate-c ertainty to high-c ertainty sedentary time and gradually increasing physical activity where evidence that regular physical activity did not result in signifi- possible, depending on ability. In the case of those living with cant change in viral load, CD4+ count or disease progression, disability, especially wheelchair users or those with low mobility, and as such, persons living with HIV are not adversely affected it is important to note that it is possible to avoid sedentary by physical activity. behaviour while sitting or lying by doing light-i ntensity or high- There was moderate- certainty to high- certainty evidence that intensity activities that do not involve the lower extremities. physical activity decreased symptoms of anxiety and depres- sion. In addition, there was moderate-c ertainty to high- certainty evidence that physical activity was associated with a reduction in DISCUSSION body fat percentage and an increase in lean body mass, but not The updated WHO 2020 Guidelines on Physical Activity and waist circumference or body mass index. Sedentary Behaviour5 provide clear, evidence-b ased, recommen- Although there was no direct evidence on sedentary dations on how much physical activity provides health benefits behaviour for these subpopulations, the GDG considered for different population groups and on the potential risks of and concluded that the evidence for general populations was sedentary behaviours. These guidelines should be used to inform applicable. Therefore, the sedentary behaviour recommenda- global, regional and national policy actions and investment, tions for adults were extrapolated to adults living with these as well as to guide and strengthen national health behaviour chronic diseases and the certainty of the evidence downgraded surveillance systems that track progress towards national for indirectness. and global targets.1 The development of these new guidelines 1458 Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 Guidelines identified important areas requiring further research and thus notion of moving more and reducing sedentary time (‘sitting also identified research priorities for the academic and research less’ for ambulatory people). Although specifying a quantitative community. threshold on the amount of sedentary behaviour was strongly considered, there was insufficient evidence. Furthermore, varia- tions in how sedentary time was measured, and that a threshold What remains the same? would likely vary by health outcome, by level of physical activity The evidence confirms the value of participating in regular and by population subgroups, made quantifying upper time physical activity to achieve health benefits across all ages and limits difficult to ascertain. abilities. Further it supports key messages that some physical The recommendation to limit sedentary behaviour was qual- activity is better than none and that more is better for optimal ified with an acknowledgement that replacing sedentary time health outcomes. More specifically, the evidence reaffirms all with any intensity of physical activity (including light intensity) adults should undertake regular physical activity and should aim has health benefits. This recommendation was based first on the to achieve at least 150 min of moderate- intensity, or 75 min of juxtaposed evidence of lower levels of time spent in sedentary vigorous- intensity aerobic physical activity per week, or some behaviours being beneficial for health even among those with equivalent combination of moderate- intensity and vigorous- modest levels of MVPA, and on the emerging, largely cross- intensity aerobic physical activity. Among children and adoles- sectional evidence, from ‘replacement’ studies (ie, isotemporal cents, an average of 60 min/day of moderate- to- vigorous substitution) demonstrating these effects more directly. Second, intensity physical activity across the week (most of which should there was evidence of effect modification between sedentary be aerobic), leads to health benefits. Furthermore, the guide- time and MVPA, which supported the development of a second lines continue to reinforce the value of muscle- strengthening recommendation emphasising the benefits of undertaking more activity for all adults and children. The key physical activity- than the recommended levels of MVPA to help reduce the specific recommendations above remain largely unchanged from detrimental effects of high levels of sedentary behaviour. The 2010 and are consistent with other recently developed physical important practical application of this recommendation is to activity guidelines from several countries.13 17–22 encourage the promotion of multiple approaches to limiting the negative health outcomes associated with high levels of sedentary What is new? time. This includes recommending individuals reduce their time There are a few important differences in the new guidelines that spent in sedentary behaviours or increase their MVPA to help should be highlighted for each age group. First, in adults, the offset the negative impact, or some combination of both strate- previous stipulation that physical activity should be accumu- gies. Given that time spent in sedentary behaviours at work, for lated in at least 10 min bouts has been removed. This change transport or for recreation appears to be overtaking time spent in reflects the accumulated evidence from cohort studies, which more healthy physical activity behaviours during waking hours, shows physical activity of any bout duration is associated with the GDG deemed it important to attend to both physical activity improved health outcomes, including all-c ause mortality.16 23 and sedentary time and, therefore, to recommend a ‘balance’ Second, these updated guidelines for adults now specify a target of these behaviours for better health. Although the evidence range of 150–300 min of moderate-i ntensity and 75–150 min of on health benefits of ‘breaking up’ sedentary time and types of vigorous- intensity physical activity, compared with the previous sedentary behaviours was reviewed, the GDG considered that guidelines that focused on achieving at least 150 min of moderate- there was insufficient evidence to provide specific quantified intensity or 75 min of vigorous- intensity activity per week. This recommendations. change acknowledges that there is a range of physical activity An additional issue related to the sedentary recommendations which captures the maximal risk reductions for health outcomes was the decision to opt specifically for the use of the term ‘seden- associated with physical activity and going beyond this range tary behaviour’ instead of ’sitting’, which has been commonly does not appreciably further decrease the risk of major outcomes used in several national guidelines. This wording choice was such as all-c ause or CVD mortality. Third, with respect to older deliberate and made to reflect the overarching agenda of these adults, the recommendation regarding multicomponent physical new guidelines to be inclusive of people living with disability activity that emphasises functional balance and strength training and therefore to emphasise options for reducing sedentary to enhance functional capacity and prevent falls now applies to behaviour among wheelchair users and those with low mobility, all older adults rather than specifically those with poor mobility. where prolonged sitting may be unavoidable. For such people, This change acknowledges the large volume of evidence demon- sedentary time can be minimised through physical activity while strating unequivocal beneficial effects of this physical activity remaining seated. type on the functional capacity and risk of falls in older people with a range of functional abilities. There was also one key change in the new recommendations Guidelines for special groups—key considerations for children and adolescents. Specifically, the updated recom- The development of recommendations on physical activity and mendation is now to do at least an ‘average of 60 min/day’ of sedentary behaviours specifically for key populations, namely, MVPA rather than the previously stated ‘accumulate 60 min of people living with disability and chronic conditions, as well as physical activity daily’. Although this might appear to be a subtle for pregnant and postpartum women, addressed important gaps difference, the change better reflects the scientific evidence as in global health policy. These new recommendations affirm that most studies reported associations between an average daily physical activity is feasible for these groups; and provides for value of physical activity rather than an accumulation of 60 min the first- time global science-b ased recommendations to inform on each and every day of the week. the development of population- based initiatives to improve The new recommendation that sedentary behaviour should health outcomes for these population groups. In particular, these be limited across all groups is an important addition to these recommendations for people living with chronic disease and new global guidelines since 2010 and is in line with other disability should stimulate increased attention in policy, surveil- recent country- level guidelines19 20 that generally support the lance, investment and research aligned to the agenda of inclusion Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 1459 Guidelines as called for in the sustainable development goals24 as well as in Promotion of muscle strengthening and falls prevention activi- the convention on the rights of people living with disability.25 ties have been largely forgotten or ignored in the past27 28 and in In undertaking this new work there were however several most countries a much greater focus on this is now required for limitations. Specifically, the association between physical activity policy and practice. and health outcomes was only reviewed for selected chronic conditions and disabilities and there was limited evidence to Implications of these guidelines for health surveillance inform on the optimal type, frequency or duration of activity These updated guidelines have several implications for future by health condition. Due to the lack of direct evidence, consid- population monitoring and research. First, currently used erable extrapolation was needed to develop the recommenda- surveillance instruments and/or protocols will need adaptation tions on physical activity and the recommendations on sedentary to align with the key changes made in these updated guidelines. behaviour relied entirely on the evidence from the general popu- Second, national population surveillance systems will need to be lation. Nonetheless, the GDG concluded the strong recommen- extended to include and track trends in key populations such dations for this population reflect the balance between desirable as children aged 5–10 years, pregnant and postpartum women, and undesirable consequences and send an important message to older adults and persons living with disability or chronic condi- support the inclusion of people living with disability in physical tions. Third, monitoring systems should be strengthened to track activity population health initiatives. trends in muscle-s trengthening exercises, which are of increasing importance with an ageing demographic in many countries. Fourth, as many countries are reliant on self- reported methods, Using these guidelines which have well- established limitations,29 there is a need to accel- Developing global guidelines is not an end in itself. The 2020 erate advancements in sensor technology to ensure it provides a WHO guidelines provide a set of evidence-b ased physical activity practical and affordable approach to assessing physical activity and sedentary behaviour recommendations that national govern- and sedentary behaviours. The potential of the new guidelines ments can adopt, thus removing the need for countries to use for advancing surveillance as well as the need for development limited resources to undertake their own scientific reviews and expert consensus process. This issue is particularly important for LMICs where resources may be limited. During adoption of these global guidelines, national policymakers are encouraged Key messages to consider their national context and factors such as culture, ethnic diversity, existing social norms and the current provision ► These new 2020 WHO Guidelines on Physical Activity and for physical activity promotion within healthcare services as well Sedentary Behaviour provide evidence- based public health as primary prevention, to inform adaptations and dissemination recommendations concerning the amount and types of of the guidelines. physical activity that offer significant health benefits and The existence of guidelines, in isolation, is unlikely to lead mitigate health risks. to increases in population levels of physical activity. It is crit- ► They update and replace the previous 2010 WHO ical that they are supported by coordinated dissemination to key recommendations on physical activity. audiences and a sustained national public education communi- ► The guidelines address children over the age of 5 years, cation strategy. Furthermore, communication activities must be adults, older adults and, for the first time, include specific combined with implementation of setting specific policy actions recommendations for pregnant and postpartum women and to support behaviour change. How to optimise the impact of people living with chronic conditions or disability. physical activity guidelines through effective communication strategies is explored in a separate paper in this issue.26 ► For all populations, the benefits of doing physical activity and limiting sedentary behaviour outweighed the potential harms. In 2018, the new GAPPA 2018–2030 set a target to reduce ► Risks can be managed by gradual increase in the amount and physical inactivity by 15% by 2030 and outlined 20 recom- intensity of physical activity. mended policy actions and interventions.1 These included ► Some physical activity is better than none for those not recommending all countries combine sustained national public currently meeting these recommendations, individuals should education and awareness campaigns with the integration of phys- start with small amounts of physical activity and gradually ical activity counselling programmes into primary and secondary increase frequency, intensity and duration over time. healthcare. Other recommendations included the creation of ► Countries are encouraged to adopt and disseminate these appropriate and supportive environments for physical activity new global guidelines to key audiences, and use them as the for all population groups and increasing opportunities for phys- basis for sustained national public education communication ical activity in schools, workplaces, cities and communities and campaigns responding to their national context and factors as a form of safe and sustainable transport. such as culture, ethnic diversity and social norms. These 2020 global guidelines provide focus to the overall ► These new guidelines should inform national policy and goal of national policy and support expanding the scope of actions to promote physical activity and reduce sedentary actions to include additional groups, such as people living with behaviours as well as to align national health behaviour disability, chronic conditions and women who are pregnant or surveillance systems that track progress towards national and post partum. National policy will need to offer a route to the global targets. development of appropriate programme delivery and practice ► Important evidence gaps remain and more research is needed that recognises community needs and the diversity of groups on the dose- response relationship between volume and/or and contexts and seeks to reduce existing disparities in access intensity of physical activity and health outcomes, particularly to and engagement in physical activity. The inclusion of global in people living with disability, and further evidence recommendations on muscle strengthening activities is not new from low- income and middle- income, disadvantaged or in these updated guidelines, but the GDG implicitly recognised underserved communities. their increasing importance due to an expanding evidence base. 1460 Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 Guidelines of device-b ased approaches to inform a new generation of guide- 15Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia; Diabetes lines is discussed by Troiano et al.30 Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester General Hospital, Leicester, UK 16Department of Exercise and Nutrition Science, Milken Institute School of Public Health, The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA Key knowledge gaps 17Department of Sport Medicine, Norwegian School of Sport Science, Oslo, Norway Despite the large quantity of data relating physical activity, and 18Department of Chronic Diseases and Ageing, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, increasingly sedentary behaviours, to health outcomes across Oslo, Norway the life-s pan, the GDG discussions revealed important evidence 19NICM Health Research Institute, Western Sydney University, Penrith, New South Wales, Australia gaps, which should be prioritised to inform future guidelines. 20Division of Psychology and Mental Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, The most common need cited is more research on the dose- UK response relationship between volume and/or intensity of phys- 21Department of Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention Research, CancerControl ical activity and health outcomes. Such information is key to Alberta, Alberta Health Services, Calgary, Alberta, Canada establishing minimal effective doses and maximum safety thresh- 22Centre for Public Health, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK 23Department of Non- Commuicable Diseases, Ministry of Health, Nairobi, Kenya olds of physical activity for different population subgroups. 24Centre for Exercise, Nutrition & Health Science, School for Policy Studies, University There also remains limited evidence from LMICs and econom- of Bristol, Bristol, UK ically disadvantaged or underserved communities and many 25Population and Public Health Sciences, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, studies are not designed or powered to test for effect modifica- Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA tion by various sociodemographic factors. Such information is 26Research Centre for Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sport, Division of Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Human Biology, Faculty of important for making more specific public health recommenda- Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa tions and reducing health disparities in more vulnerable sectors 27Department ofEpidemiology and Preventive Medicine, University of Regensburg, of the population. Further details on the research gaps arising Germany from these new guidelines can also be found elsewhere.31 28Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, UK 29PROFITH (PROmoting FITness and Health through physical activity) research group, CONCLUSIONS Department of Physical Education and Sports, Faculty of Sport Sciences, Research These new, updated WHO guidelines on physical activity and Institute of Sport and Health, University of Granada, Spain sedentary behaviour, together with the WHO guidelines for 30Sports and Exercise Medicine Unit and Department of Allied Health Sciences, under 5 years of age,6 provide recommendations on physical Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka activity and sedentary behaviour for individuals across the whole 31Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, age spectrum and address a long- lasting gap with the inclusion of Australia key populations for the first time. Collectively, the recommen- 32Institute for Musculoskeletal Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South dations affirm the importance of regular aerobic and muscle- Wales, Australia strengthening physical activity and reduction in sedentary 33Epidemiology and Genomics Research Program, National Cancer Institute, behaviours. Benefits accrue from doing any amount of physical Bethesda, Maryland, USA 34Department of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam Public Health Research activity and this applies to people of all ages and abilities. There Institute, Amsterdam Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands are significant health gains and cost savings to health systems if 35Prevention Research Collaboration, School of Public Health, The University of countries adopt these guidelines and direct efforts and resources Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia to implementation of programmes and policy to enable achieve- 36National Department of Health, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea ment of the 2030 GAPPA target set out in the global action plan on physical activity.1 Benefits extend also beyond the health Twitter Matthew P Buman @mbuman, Ulf Ekelund @Ulf_Ekelund, Estelle sector as mounting evidence across diverse fields shows the inter- Lambert @vickilambert, Karen Milton @karenmilton8, Emmanuel Stamatakis @M_ Stamatakis and Anne Tiedemann @AnneTiedemann1 connected social, economic and environmental impacts of more physically active populations. Now, it is time to work to ensure Acknowledgements The work and contributions to support this work from the following are gratefully acknowledged: the systematic reviews of evidence prepared and support the adoption and implementation of these new for 2018 US Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee Scientific Report global guidelines for a healthier, more active future worldwide. to the Secretary of US Department of Health and Human Services were updated thanks to additional literature searches conducted by Kyle Sprow (National Cancer Author affiliations Institutes, National Institutes of Health, Maryland, USA). Summaries of evidence and 1Physical Activity Unit, Department of Health Promotion, World Health Organization, GRADE tables were prepared by Carrie Patnode and Michelle Henninger (The Kaiser Geneva, Switzerland Foundation Hospitals, Center for Health Research, Portland, Oregon, USA). Additional 2School of Human Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Western reviews of evidence were led by C Sherrington (Institute for Musculoskeletal Health, Australia, Australia School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; S Mabweazara 3Health Promotion Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (Research Centre for Health through Physical Activity, Lifestyle and Sports Medicine, 4Centre for Health Research, University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa) and Queensland, Australia L Leach (Department of Sport, Recreation and Exercise Science, Faculty of Health 5Age Institute, Helsinki, Finland Sciences, University of the Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa); E Verhagen and 6Public Health Evaluation and Projection Unit, Finnish Institute for Health and P Coenen (Department of Public and Occupational Health at Amsterdam University Welfare, Helsinki, Uusimaa, Finland Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Erin Dooley (National Cancer 7College of Health Solutions, Arizona State University, Phoenix, Arizona, USA Institutes, National Institutes of Health, Maryland, USA) kindly provided support for 8Department of Movement and Sports Sciences, Ghent University, Belgium the referencing and proof- reading of the manuscript. The many research assistants 9Institute of Technology Tralee, Tralee, Co Kerry, Ireland that supported members of the GDG in reviewing the evidence and preparation of 10UNESCO Chair of Transforming the Lives of People with Disabilities, their Families draft evidence summaries. and Communities, Through Physical Education, Sport, Recreation and Fitness 11Healthy Active Living and Obesity Research Group, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Contributors All authors were involved in conceptualising the paper, drafting, Ontario Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, revisions and editing and final review. FB led the overall development of the Ontario, Canada paper. JW and FB led the drafting of the method section. All authors reviewed and 12School of Health and Life Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK approved the final paper. 13Departments of Medicine, and Medical Informatics & Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Funding The Public Health Agency of Canada and the Government of Norway Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA provided financial support, without which this work could not have been completed. 14MRC Epidemiology Unit, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK Competing interests None declared. Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 1461 Guidelines Patient and public involvement Patients and/or the public were involved in the 12 Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. 2018 physical activity guidelines design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research. Refer to the Advisory Committee scientific report. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and ’Methods’ section for further details. Human Services, 2018. 13 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Physical activity guidelines for Patient consent for publication Not required. Americans. 2nd edition. Washington, DC: U.S: Department of Health and Human Ethics approval This study was approved by the WHO Guidelines Review Services, 2018. Committee in August 2020. 14 Nussbaumer- Streit B, Klerings I, Dobrescu AI, et al. Excluding non- English publications Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. from evidence- syntheses did not change conclusions: a meta- epidemiological study. J Clin Epidemiol 2020;118:42–54. Data availability statement All data relevant to the study are included in 15 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. Grade: an emerging consensus on rating quality the article. Further details, including the evidence profile tables summarising the of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336:924–6. evidence used for all recommendations, are available from WHO. 16 Jakicic JM, Kraus WE, Powell KE, et al. Association between bout duration of physical Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the activity and health: systematic review. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2019;51:1213–9. Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 17 Weggemans RM, Backx FJG, Borghouts L, et al. The 2017 Dutch physical activity others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any guidelines. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2018;15:58. purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given, 18 Department of Health & Social Care. UK Chief Medical Officers’ Physical Activity and indication of whether changes were made. See: https:// creativecommons. org/ Guidelines, 2019. Available: https:// assets.p ublishing. service.g ov. uk/g overnment/ licenses/b y/ 4.0 /. uploads/s ystem/ uploads/a ttachment_ data/fi le/ 832868/u k- chief-m edical- officers- physical-a ctivity- guidelines.p df ORCID iDs 19 Australian Government, The Department of Health. Australian 24- hour movement Fiona C Bull http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0001- 8035- 4973 guidelines for children (5-12 years) and young people (13-17 years): an integration of Matthew P Buman http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0002- 5130- 3162 physical activity, sedentary behavior, and sleep, 2019. Available: https://www. health. Jean-P hilippe Chaput http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0002- 5607- 5736 gov.a u/ internet/ main/ publishing. nsf/ Content/t i- 5-1 7years Sebastien Chastin http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0003- 1421- 9348 20 Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology (CSEP). Canadian 24- hour movement Ulf Ekelund http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0003- 2115- 9267 guidelines for children and youth (ages 5-17 years): an integration of physical activity, Russell Jago http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0002- 3394- 0176 sedentary behaviour and sleep. Ottowa, Ontario, CANADA, 2016. Estelle Lambert http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0003- 4315- 9153 21 Canadian Society for Exercise Physiology. Canadian 24- hour movement guidelines: Karen Milton http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0002- 0506- 2214 an integration of physical activity, sedentary behaviour, and sleep, 2017. Available: Emmanuel Stamatakis http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0001- 7323- 3225 https:// csepguidelines. ca [Accessed 2 May 2020]. Richard P Troiano http://o rcid. org/0 000- 0002- 6807- 989X 22 Commonwealth of Australia. Australia’s Physical Activity and Sedentary Behavior Guidelines, 2014. Available: https:// www1. health. gov.a u/ internet/ main/ publishing. REFERENCES nsf/c ontent/ F01F9 232 8EDAD A5B CA257 BF0 001E720D/$F ile/ brochure%2 0PA% 20Guidelines_A 5_ 18-6 4yrs. PDF [Accessed 2 May 2020]. 1 World Health Organization. Global action plan on physical activity 2018-2030: more 23 Ekelund U, Tarp J, Steene-J ohannessen J, et al. Dose- Response associations active people for a healthier world. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2018. between accelerometry measured physical activity and sedentary time and 2 World Health Organization. Global recommendations on physical activity for health. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2010. all cause mortality: systematic review and harmonised meta- analysis. BMJ 3 Guthold R, Stevens GA, Riley LM, et al. Worldwide trends in insufficient physical 2019;366:l4570. activity from 2001 to 2016: a pooled analysis of 358 population- based surveys with 2 4 United Nations. Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable 1·9 million participants. Lancet Glob Health 2018;6:e1077–86. development. New York: United Nations, 2015. 4 Guthold R, Stevens GA, Riley LM, et al. Global trends in insufficient physical activity 2 5 United Nations. The convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. New York: among adolescents: a pooled analysis of 298 population- based surveys with 1·6 United Nations Headquarters, 2006. million participants. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2020;4:23–35. 26 Milton K, Bauman A, G F, et al. Maximising the impact of global and national 5 World Health Organization. Guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour. physical activity guidelines - the critical role of communication strategies. Br J Sports Geneva: World Health Organization, 2020. Med2020. 6 World Health Organization. Guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and 27 Strain T, Milton K, Dall P, et al. How are we measuring physical activity and sedentary sleep for children under 5 years of age. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2019. behaviour in the four home nations of the UK? A narrative review of current 7 World Health Organization. Who Handbook for Guideline development -. 2nd ed. surveillance measures and future directions. Br J Sports Med 2019. doi:10.1136/ Geneva: World Health Organization, 2014. bjsports-2018-100355. [Epub ahead of print: 22 May 2019]. 8 Poitras VJ, Gray CE, Borghese MM, et al. Systematic review of the relationships 28 Milton K, Varela AR, Strain T, et al. A review of global surveillance on the muscle between objectively measured physical activity and health indicators in school-a ged strengthening and balance elements of physical activity recommendations. J Frailty children and youth. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2016;41:S197–239. Sarcopenia Falls 2018;3:114–24. 9 Carson V, Hunter S, Kuzik N, et al. Systematic review of sedentary behaviour and 29 Wijndaele K, White T, Andersen LB, et al. Substituting prolonged sedentary time and health indicators in school- aged children and youth: an update. Appl Physiol Nutr cardiovascular risk in children and youth: a meta- analysis within the International Metab 2016;41:S240–65. children’s Accelerometry database (ICAD). Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2019;16:96. 10 Okely AD, Ghersi D, Loughran SP, et al. Australian 24- hour movement guidelines for 30 Troiano RP, Stamatakis E, Bull F. How can global physical activity surveillance adapt children (5-12 years) and young people (13-17 years): an integration of physical to evolving physical activity guidelines? needs, challenges, and future directions. Br J activity, sedentary behaviour, and sleep — research report: Australian government, Sports Med2020. department of health, 2019. 31 DiPietro L, Al- Ansari S, Biddle S, et al. Advancing the global physical activity agenda: 11 Mottola MF, Davenport MH, Ruchat S- M, et al. 2019 Canadian guideline for physical recommendations for future research by the 2020 who physical activity and sedentary activity throughout pregnancy. Br J Sports Med 2018;52:1339–46. behavior guidelines development group. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. In Press 2020. 1462 Bull FC, et al. Br J Sports Med 2020;54:1451–1462. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955